ARYAN, a term which has been used in a confusing variety of
significations by different philologists. By Max Müller especially it
was employed as a convenient short term for the whole body of languages
more commonly known as Indo-European (q.v.) or Indo-Germanic. In the
same way Max Müller used Aryas as a general term for the speakers of
such languages, as in his book published in 1888, _Biographies of Words
and the Home of the Aryas_. "Aryas are those who speak Aryan languages,
whatever their colour, whatever their blood. In calling them Aryas we
predicate nothing of them except that the grammar of their language is
Aryan" (p. 245). It is to be observed, therefore, that Max Müller is
careful to avoid any ethnological signification. The Aryas are those who
speak Aryan without regard to the question whether Aryan is their
_hereditary_ language or not. As he says still more definitely elsewhere
in the same work (p. 120), "I have declared again and again that if I
say Aryas, I mean neither blood nor bones, nor hair nor skull; I mean
simply those who speak an Aryan language. The same applies to Hindus,
Greeks, Romans Germans, Celts and Slaves. When I speak of them I commit
myself to no anatomical characteristics. The blue-eyed and fair-haired
Scandinavians may have been conquerors or conquered, they may have
adopted the language of their darker lords or their subjects, or vice
versa. I assert nothing beyond their language when I call them Hindus,
Greeks, Romans, Germans, Celts and Slaves; and in that sense, and in
that sense only, do I say that even the blackest Hindus represent an
earlier stage of Aryan speech and thought than the fairest
Scandinavians.... To me an ethnologist who speaks of Aryan race, Aryan
blood, Aryan eyes and hair, is as great a sinner as a linguist who
speaks of a dolichocephalic dictionary or a brachycephalic grammar."

From the popularity of Max Müller's works on comparative philology this
is the use of the word which is most familiar to the general public. The
arguments in support of this use are set forth by him in the latter part
of lecture vi. of the _Lectures on the Science of Language_ (first
series) and as an appendix to chap. vii. of the final edition (i. pp. 291
ff.). The Sanskrit usage of the word is fully illustrated by him from the
early Sanskrit writings in the article "Aryan" in the ninth edition of
this encyclopaedia. From the earliest occurrences of the word it is clear
that it was used as a national name not only in India but also in Bactria
and Persia (in Sanskrit _árya_- and _arya_, in Zend _airya_-, in Old
Persian _ariya_-). That it is in any way connected with a Sanskrit word
for earth, _ira_, as Max Müller asserts, is far from certain. As Spiegel
remarks (_Die arische Periode_, p. 105), though it is easy enough to
connect the word with a root _ar_-, there are several roots of that form
which have different meanings, and there is no certain criterion whereby
to decide to which of them it is related. Nor are the other connexions
for the word outside this group free from doubt. It is, however, certain
that the connexion with _Erin_ (Ireland), which Pictet in his article
"Iren and Arier" (Kuhn and Schleicher's _Beiträge_, i. 1858, pp. 81 ff.)
sought to establish, is impossible (Whitley Stokes in Max Müller's
_Lectures_, 1891, i. pp. 299 f.), though the word may have the same
origin as the _Ario_- of names like _Ariovistus_, which is found in both
Celtic and Germanic words (Uhlenbeck, _Kurzgefasstes etymologisches
Wörterbuch der altindischen Sprache_, s.v.). The name of Armenia (Old
Persian _Armina_-), which has often been connected, is of uncertain
origin. Within Sanskrit itself probably two words have to be
distinguished: (1) _árya_, the origin of Aryan, from which the usual term
_arya_ is a derivative; (2) _aryá_, which frequently appears in the _Rig
Veda_ as an epithet of deities. In many passages, however, _aryás_ may
equally well be the genitive of _arí_, which is explained as "active,
devoted, pious." Even in this word probably two originally separate words
have to be distinguished, for the further meanings which Grassmann in his
dictionary to the _Rig Veda_ attaches to it, viz. "greedy" (for treasure
and for battle), "godless," "enemy," seem more appropriately to be
derived from the same source as the Greek [Greek: eri-s], "strife." The
word _árya_- is not found as a national name in the _Rig Veda_, but
appears in the _Vajasaneyi-sainhita_, where it is explained by Mahidhara
as _Vaisya_-, a cultivator or a man of the third among the original four
classes of the population. So in the _Atharva Veda_ (iv. 20. 4; xix. 62.
1) it is contrasted with the Sudra or fourth class (Spiegel, _Arische
Periode_, p. 102). In the _Avesta, airya_- is found both as adjective and
substantive in the sense of Aryan, but no light is thrown upon the
history of the word. Darius describes himself in an inscription as of
Aryan stock, _Daraya[h]va[h]us ariya[h]civ[r]a[h]_. In the _Avesta_ the
derivative _airyana_- is also found in the sense of Aryan. In both India
and Persia a word is found (Skt. _aryaman_-; Zend _airyahman_-) which is
apparently of the same origin. In both Sanskrit and Zend it means
something like "comrade" or "bosom friend," but in Zend is used of the
priestly or highest class. In Sanskrit, besides this use in which it is
contrasted with the _Dasa_ or _Dasyu_, the enemies, the earlier
inhabitants, the word is often used for the bridegroom's spokesman, and
in both languages is also employed as the name of a divine being. In the
_Rig Veda, Aryaman_- as a deity is most frequently coupled with Mitra and
Varuna (Grassmann, _Wörterbuch_, s.v.); in Zend, according to Bartholomae
(_Altiranisches Wörterbuch_, s.v.), from the earliest literature, the
Gathas, there is nothing definite to be learnt regarding _Airyaman_.

Whatever the origin of _arya_-, however, it is clear that it is a word
with dignified associations, by which the peoples belonging to the
Eastern section of the Indo-Europeans were proud to call themselves. It
is now used uniformly by scholars to indicate the Eastern branch as a
whole, a compound, _Indo-Aryan_, being employed for that part of the
Eastern branch which settled in India to distinguish them from the
Iranians (_Iran_ is of the same origin), who remained in Bactria and
Persia, while _Aryo-Indian_ is sometimes employed to distinguish the
Indian people of this stock from the Dravidian and other stocks which
also inhabit parts of the Indian peninsula. Of the stages in the
occupation of the Iranian table-land by the Aryan people nothing is
known, the people themselves having apparently no tradition of a time
when they did not hold these territories (Spiegel, _Arische Periode_, p.
319). Though the Hindus have no tradition of their invasion of India, it
is certain that they are not an indigenous people, and, if they are not,
it is clear that they could have come in no other direction save from
the other side of the Hindu Kush. At the period of their earliest
literature, which may be assigned roughly to about 1000 B.C., they were
still settled in the valley of the Indus, and at this time the
separation probably had not long taken place, the Eastern portion of the
stock having pushed their way along the Kabul valley into the open
country of the Indus. According to Professor E.W. Hopkins (_India Old
and New_, 1901, p. 31) the _Rig Veda_ was composed in the district about
Umballa. He argues that the people must have been then to the west of
the great rivers, otherwise the dawn could not be addressed as one who
"in shining light, before the wind arises, comes gleaming over the
waters, making good paths." The vocabulary is still largely the same;
whole sentences can be transliterated from one language to the other
merely by making regular phonetic changes and without the variation of a
single word (for examples see Bartholomae, _Handbuch der altiranischen
Dialekte_, 1883, p. v.; Williams Jackson, _Avesta Grammar_, 1892, pp.
xxxi. f.; _Grundriss der iranischen Philologie_, 1895, i. p. 1). It is
noteworthy that it is those who remain behind whose language has
undergone most change.

By four well-marked characteristics the Aryan group is easily
distinguishable from the other Indo-European languages. (1) By the
confusion of original _e_ and _o_, both long and short, with the
original long and short _a_ sound; (2) the short schwa-sound [schwa] is
represented here, and in this group only, by _i_ (_pita_, "father," as
compared with [Greek: pataer], &c.); (3) original _s_ after _i_, _u_ and
some consonants becomes s; (4) the genitive plural of stems ending in a
vowel has a suffix-_nam_ borrowed by analogy from the stems ending in
_-n_ (Skt. _ásvanam_, "of horses"; Zend _aspanam_; Old Persian
_aspanam_). The distinctions between Sanskrit and Iranian are also
clear, (1) The Aryan voiced aspirates _gh, dh, bh_, which survive in
Sanskrit, are confused in Iranian with original _g, d, b_, and further
changes take place in the language of the later parts of the Avesta; (2)
the Aryan breathed aspirates _kh, th, ph_, except in combination with
certain consonants, become spirants in Iranian; (3) Aryan _s_ becomes
_h_ initially before vowels in Iranian and also in certain cases
medially, Iranian in these respects resembling Greek (cf. Skt. _saptá_;
Zend _hapta_; Gr. [Greek: hepta], "seven"); (4) in Zend there are many
vowel changes which it does not share with Old Persian. Some of these
arise from the umlaut or epenthesis which is so prevalent, and which we
have already seen in _airya_- as compared with the Skt. _árya_. In other
respects the languages are remarkably alike, the only striking
difference being in the numeral "one"--Skt. _eka_-; Zend _aeva_-; Old
Persian _aiva_-, where the Iranian group has the same stem as that seen
in the Greek [Greek: oi(f)o-s], "alone."

For the subdivisions of the two groups see the articles on PERSIA:
_Language_, and INDO-ARYAN LANGUAGES. Dr Grierson has shown in his
monograph on "The Pisaca Languages of North-Western India" (Royal
Asiatic Society, 1906) that there is good reason for regarding various
dialects of the north-western frontier (Kafiristan, Chitral, Gilgit,
Dardistan) as a separate group descended from Aryan but independent of
either Sanskrit or Iranian.

The history of the separation of the Aryan from the other Indo-European
languages is not yet clear (see INDO-EUROPEAN LANGUAGES). Various
attempts have been made, with little success, to identify fragments of
unknown languages in cuneiform inscriptions with members of this group.
The investigation has entered a new and more favourable stage as the
result of the discoveries made by German excavators at Boghaz Keui (said
to be identical with Herodotus' Pteria in Cappadocia), where treaties
between the king of the Hittites and the king of Mitanni, in the
beginning of the 14th century B.C., seem almost certainly to contain the
names of the gods Mitra, Varuna and Indra, which belong to the early
Aryan mythology (H. Winckler, _Mitteilungen der deutschen
Orientgesellschaft_, No. 35; E. Meyer, _Sitzungsberichte der Berliner
Akademie_, 1908, pp. 14 ff.; _Zeitschrift für vergleichende
Sprachforschung_, 42, 1908, pp. 24 ff.). Still further light is to be
expected when the vast collections of the German expedition to Turfan
(Turkestan) have been sifted. Up to 1909 only a preliminary account had
been given of Tocharish, a hitherto unknown Indo-European language,
which is reported to be in some respects more akin to the Western groups
than to Aryan. But further investigation is still required (see E. Sieg
and W. Siegling, "Tocharisch, die Sprache der Indoskythen," in
_Sitzungsberichte der Berl. Akad._ (July 1908, pp. 915 ff.).     (P. Gi.)