AS, the Roman unit of weight and measure, divided into 12 _unciae_
(whence both "ounce" and "inch"); its fractions being deunx 11/12,
dextrans 5/6, dodrans ¾, bes 2/3, septunx 7/12, semis ½, quincunx 5/12,
triens 1/3, quadrans ¼, sextans 1/6, sescuncia 1/8, uncia 1/12. _As_
really denoted any integer or whole; whence the English word "ace." The
unit or _as_ of weight was the _libra_ (pound: = about 11-4/5 oz.
avoirdupois); of length, _pes_ (foot: = about 11-3/5 in.); of surface,
_jugerum_ ( = about 2/3 acre); of measure, liquid _amphora_ (about 5-3/5
gal.), dry _modius_ (about 9/10 peck). In the same way _as_ signified a
whole inheritance; whence _heres ex asse_, the heir to the whole estate,
_heres ex semisse_, heir to half the estate. It was also used in the
calculation of rates of interest.

_As_ was also the name of a Roman coin, which was of different weight
and value at different periods (see NUMISMATICS, § _Roman_). The first
introduction of coined money is ascribed to Servius Tullius. The old
_as_ was composed of the mixed metal _aes_, an alloy of copper, tin and
lead, and was called _as libralis_, because it nominally weighed 1 lb.
or 12 ounces (actually 10). Its original shape seems to have been an
irregular oblong bar, which was stamped with the figure of a sheep, ox
or sow. This, as well as the word _pecunia_ for money (_pecus_, cattle),
indicates the fact of cattle having been the earliest Italian medium of
exchange. The value was indicated by little points or globules, or other
marks. After the round shape was introduced, the one side was always
inscribed with the figure of a ship's prow, and the other with the
double head of Janus. The subdivisions of the _as_ had also the ship's
prow on one side, and on the other the head of some deity. The First
Punic War having exhausted the treasury, the _as_ was reduced to 2 oz.
In the Second Punic War it was again reduced to half this weight, viz.
to 1 oz. And lastly, by the Papirian law (89 B.C.) it was further
reduced to the diminutive weight of half an ounce. It appears to have
been still more reduced under Octavian, Lepidus and Antony, when its
value was 1/3 of an ounce. Before silver coinage was introduced (269
B.C.) the value of the _as_ was about 6d., in the time of Cicero less
than a halfpenny. In the time of the emperor Severus it was again
lowered to about 5/24 of an ounce. During the commonwealth and empire
_aes grave_ was used to denote the old as in contradistinction to the
existing depreciated coin; while _aes rude_ was applied to the original
oblong coinage of primitive times.