ASA, in the Bible, son (or, perhaps, rather brother) of Abijah, the son
of Rehoboam and king of Judah (1 Kings xv. 9-24). Of his long reign,
during which he was a contemporary of Baasha, Zimri and Omri of Israel,
little is recorded with the exception of some religious reforms and
conflicts with the first-named. Baasha succeeded in fortifying Ramah
(_er-Ram_), 5 m. north of Jerusalem, and Asa was compelled to use the
residue of the temple-funds (cf. 1 Kings xiv. 26) to bribe the king of
Damascus to renounce his league with Baasha and attack Israel. Galilee
was invaded and Baasha was forced to return; the building material which
he had collected at Ramah being used by Asa to fortify Geba, and Mizpah
to the immediate north of Jerusalem. The Book of Chronicles relates a
story of a sensational defeat of Zerah the "Cushite," and a great
religious revival in which Judah and Israel took part (2 Chron. xiv.-xv.
15) (see CHRONICLES). Asa was succeeded by his son Jehoshaphat.

"Cushite" may designate an Ethiopian or, more probably, an Arabian
(Cush, the "father" of the Sabaeans, Gen. x. 7). "If by Zerah the
Ethiopian or Sabaean prince be meant, the only real difficulty of the
narrative is removed. No king Zerah of Ethiopia is known at this period,
nor does there seem to be room for such a person." (W.E. Barnes,
_Cambridge Bible_, Chronicles, p. xxxi.). The identification with
Osorkon I. or II. is scarcely tenable considering Asa's weakness; but
inroads by desert hordes frequently troubled Judah, and if the tradition
be correct in locating the battle at Mareshah it is probable that the
invaders were in league with the Philistine towns. Similar situations
recur in the reigns of Ahaz and Jehoram.

  See also Wellhausen, _Prolegomena_, 208; S.A. Cook, _Expositor_ (June
  1906), p. 540 sq.     (S. A. C.)