ASCITES, ([Greek: askitaes] dropsical, from [Greek: askosaskos] _sc_.
[Greek: nosos] disease), the term in medicine applied to an effusion of
non-inflammatory fluid within the peritoneum. It is not a disease in
itself, but is one of the manifestations of disease elsewhere--usually
in the kidneys, heart, or in connexion with the liver (portal
obstruction). Portal obstruction is the commonest cause of well-marked
ascites. It is produced by (1) diseases within the liver, as cirrhosis
(usually alcoholic) and cancer; (2) diseases outside the liver, as
cancer of stomach, duodenum or pancreas, causing pressure on the portal
vein, or enlarged glands in the fissure of the liver producing the same
effect. Ascites is one of the late symptoms in the disease, and precedes
dropsy of the leg, which may come on later, due to pressure on the large
veins in the abdominal cavity by the ascitic fluid. In ascites due to
heart disease, the dropsy of the feet and legs precedes the ascites, and
there will be a history of palpitation, shortness of breath, and perhaps
cough. In the ascites of kidney troubles there will be a history of
general oedema--puffiness of face and eyes on rising in the morning
probably having attracted the attention of the patient or his friends
previously. Other less common causes of ascites are chronic peritonitis,
either tuberculous in the young, or due to cancer in the aged, and more
rarely still pernicious anaemia.