ASGILL, JOHN (1659-1738), English writer, was born at Hanley Castle, in
Worcestershire, in 1659. He was bred to the law, and gained considerable
reputation in his profession, increased by two pamphlets--the first
(1696) advocating the establishment of some currency other than the
usual gold and silver, the second (1698) on a registry for titles of
lands. In 1699, when a commission was appointed to settle disputed
claims in Ireland, he set out for that country, attracted by the hopes
of practice. Before leaving London he put in the hands of the printer a
tract, entitled _An Argument proving that, according to the Covenant of
Eternal Life revealed in the Scripture, Man may be translated from hence
into that Eternal Life without passing through Death_ (1700). Coleridge
has highly praised the "genuine Saxon English," the "irony" and "humour"
of this extraordinary pamphlet, which interpreted the relation between
God and man by the technical rules of law, and insisted that, Christ
having wiped out Adam's sin, the penalty of death must consequently be
illegal for those who claim exemption. How far it was meant seriously
was doubted at the time, and may be doubted now. But its fame preceded
the author to Ireland, and was of material service in securing his
professional success, so that he amassed money, purchased an estate, and
married a daughter of the second Lord Kenmare. He was returned both to
the Irish and English parliaments, but was expelled from both on account
of his "blasphemous" pamphlet. He was also involved in money
difficulties, and litigation about his Irish estate, and these
circumstances may have had something to do with his trouble in
parliament. In 1707 he was arrested for debt, and the remainder of his
life was spent in the Fleet prison, or within the rules of the king's
bench. He died in 1738. Asgill also wrote in 1714-1715 some pamphlets
defending the Hanoverian succession against the claims of the Pretender.