ASH[1] (Ger. _Esche_), a common name (Fr. _fréne_) given to certain
trees. The common ash (_Fraxinus excelsior_) belongs to the natural
order Oleaceae, the olive family, an order of trees and shrubs which
includes lilac, privet and jasmine. The Hebrew word _Oren_, translated
"ash" in Isaiah xliv. 14, cannot refer to an ash tree, as that is not a
native of Palestine, but probably refers to the Aleppo pine (_Pinus
halepensis_). The ash is a native of Great Britain and the greater part
of Europe, and also extends to Asia. The tree is distinguished for its
height and contour, as well as for its graceful foliage. It attains a
height of from 50 to 80 ft., and flowers in March and April, before the
leaves are developed. The reddish flowers grow in clusters, but are not
showy. They are naked, that is without sepals or petals, and generally
imperfect, wanting either stamens or pistil. The large leaves, which are
late in appearing, are pinnately compound, bearing four to seven pairs
of gracefully tapering toothed leaflets on a slender stalk. The dry
winged fruits, the so-called keys, are a characteristic feature and
often remain hanging in bunches long after the leaves have fallen in
autumn. The leaves fall early, but the greyish twigs and black buds
render the tree conspicuous in winter and especially in early spring.

The ash is in Britain next in value to the oak as a timber-tree. It
requires a good deep loam with gravelly subsoil, and a situation
naturally sheltered, such as the steep banks of glens, rivers or lakes;
in cold and wet clay it does not succeed. As the value of the timber
depends chiefly on its toughness and elasticity, it is best grown in
masses where the soil is good; the trunk is thus drawn up free from
large side-branches. The tree is easily propagated from seeds; it throws
up strong root shoots. The ash requires much light, but grows rapidly,
and its terminal shoots pierce easily through thickets of beech, with
which it is often associated. Unmixed ash plantations are seldom
satisfactory, because the foliage does not sufficiently cover the
ground; but when mixed with beech it grows well, and attains great
height and girth. Owing to the dense mass of roots which it sends out
horizontally a little beneath the surface of the ground, the ash does
much harm to vegetation beneath its shade, and is therefore obnoxious as
a hedgerow tree. Coppice shoots yield excellent hop-poles, crates,
hoops, whip-handles, &c. The timber is much used for agricultural
implements, and by coach-builders and wheelwrights.

A variety of the common species, known as var. _heterophylla_, has
simple leaves. It occurs wild in woods in Europe and England. Another
variety of ash (_pendula_) is met with in which the branches are
pendulous and weeping. Sometimes this variety is grafted on the tall
stem of the common ash, so as to produce a pleasing effect. It is said
that the weeping variety was first observed at Gamlingay, in
Cambridgeshire. A variety (_crispa_) occurs with curled leaves, and
another with warty stems and branches, called _verrucosa_. _F. Ornus_ is
the manna ash (see MANNA), a handsome tree with greenish-white flowers
and native in south Europe. In southern Europe there is a small-leaved
ash, called _Fraxinus parvifolia_. _F. floribunda_, a large tree with
terminal panicles of white flowers, is a native of the Himalayas. In
America there are several species--such as _Fraxinus americana_, the
white ash; _F. pubescens_, the red ash; and _F. sambucifolia_, the black
ash.

The "mountain ash" belongs to a totally different family from the common
ash. It is called _Pyrus Aucuparia_, and belongs to the natural order
Rosaceae, and the tribe _Pomeae_, which includes also apples, pears, &c.
Its common name is probably due to its resemblance to the true ash, in
its smooth grey bark, graceful ascending branches, and especially the
form of the leaf, which is also pinnately compound but smaller than in
the true ash. Its common name in Scotland is the rowan tree; it is well
known by its clusters of white blossoms and succulent scarlet fruit. The
name of poison ash is given to _Rhus venenata_, the North American
poison elder or sumach, belonging to the Anacardiaceae (Cashew family).
The bitter ash of the West Indies is _Simaruba excelsa_, which belongs
to the natural order Simarubaceae. The Cape ash is _Ekebergia capensis_,
belonging to the natural order Meliaceae, a large tree, a native of the
Cape of Good Hope. The prickly ash, _Xanthoxylon Clava-Herculis_ (nat.
ord. Xanthoxyleae), a native of the south-eastern United States, is a
small tree, the trunk of which is studded with corky tubercles, while
the branches are armed with stout, sharp, brown prickles.

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] The homonym, ash or (pl.) ashes, the residue (of a body, &c.)
    after burning, is a common Teutonic word, Ger. _Asche_, connected
    with the root found in Lat. _ardere_, to burn.