ASHBURTON, ALEXANDER BARING, 1ST BARON[1] (1774-1848), English
politician and financier, 2nd son of Sir Francis Baring (the founder of
the house of Baring Brothers & Co.) and of Harriet, daughter of William
Herring, was born on the 27th of October 1774, and was brought up in his
father's business. He was sent by the latter to the United States;
married Anne, daughter of William Bingham, of Philadelphia, and formed
wide connexions with American houses. In 1810, by his father's death, he
became head of the firm. He sat in parliament for Taunton (1806-1826),
Callington (1826-1831), Thetford (1831-1832), North Essex (1832-1835).
He regarded politics from the point of view of the business man, opposed
the orders in council, and the restrictions on trade with the United
States in 1812, and in 1826 the act for the suppression of small
bank-notes. He was a strong antagonist of Reform. He accepted the post
of chancellor of the exchequer in the duke of Wellington's projected
ministry of 1832; but afterwards, alarmed at the scene in parliament,
declared "he would face a thousand devils rather than such a House of
Commons," and advised the recall of Lord Grey. In 1834 he was president
of the board of trade and master of the mint in Sir Robert Peel's
government, and on the latter's retirement was created Baron Ashburton
on the 10th of April 1835, taking the title previously held by John
Dunning, his aunt's husband. In 1842 he was despatched to America, and
the same year concluded the Ashburton or Webster-Ashburton treaty. A
compromise was settled concerning the north-east boundary of Maine, the
extradition of certain criminals was arranged, each state agreed to
maintain a squadron of at least eighty guns on the coast of Africa for
the suppression of the slave trade, and the two governments agreed to
unite in an effort to persuade other powers to close all slave markets
within their territories. Despite his earlier attitude, Lord Ashburton
disapproved of Peel's free-trade projects, and opposed the Bank Charter
Act of 1844. He was a trustee of the British Museum and of the National
Gallery, a privy councillor and D.C.L. of Oxford. He published, besides
several speeches, _An Enquiry into the Causes and Consequences of the
Orders in Council_ (1808), and _The Financial and Commercial Crisis
Considered_ (1847). He died on the 13th of May 1848, leaving a large
family, his eldest son becoming 2nd baron. The 5th baron (b. 1866)
succeeded to the title in 1889.

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] i.e. in the existing line; see below for the earlier creation.