'ASHER BEN-YEHIEL (known as _Rosh_), Jewish rabbi and codifier, was born
in the Rhine district c. 1250, and died in Toledo 1327. Endangered by
the persecutions inflicted on the German Jews in the 13th century,
'Asher fled to Spain, where he was made rabbi of Toledo. His enforced
exile impoverished him, and from this date begins an important change in
the status of medieval rabbis. Before the 14th century, rabbis had
obtained a livelihood by the exercise of some secular profession,
particularly medicine, and received no salary for performing the
rabbinic function. This was now changed. A disciple of Meir of
Rothenburg, 'Asher's sole interest was in the Talmud. He was a man of
austere piety, profound and narrow. He was a determined opponent of the
study of philosophy, and thus was antipathetic to the Spanish spirit.
The Jews of Spain continued, nevertheless, devotees of secular sciences
as well as of rabbinical lore. 'Asher was the first of the German rabbis
to display strong talent for systematization, and his chief work partook
of the nature of a compendium of the Talmud. Compiled between 1307 and
1314, 'Asher's _Compendium_ resembled, and to a large extent superseded,
the work of 'Al-phasi (q.v.). 'Asher's _Compendium_ is printed in most
editions of the Talmud, and it differed from previous Compendia in
greater simplicity and in the deference shown to German authorities.
'Asher's son Jacob, who died at Toledo before 1340, was the author of
the four _Turim_, a very profound and popular codification of rabbinical
law. This work was the standard code until Joseph Qaro directly based on
it his widely accepted Code of Jewish law, the _Shulhan 'Arukh_.
     (I. A.)