ASHEVILLE, a city and the county-seat of Buncombe county, North
Carolina, U.S.A., in the mountainous Blue Ridge region in the west part
of the state, about 210 m. W. of Raleigh. Pop. (1890) 10,235; (1900)
14,692, of whom 4724 were negroes; (1910, census) 18,762. Asheville is
situated at the junction of three branches of the Southern railway, on a
high terrace on the east bank of the French Broad river, at the mouth of
the Swannanoa, about 2300 ft. above the sea. The city is best known as
one of the most popular health and pleasure resorts in the south, being
a summer resort for southerners and a winter resort for northerners. It
has a dry and equable climate and beautiful scenery. Among its social
clubs are the Albemarle, the Asheville, the Elks, the Tahkeeostee and
the Swannanoa Country clubs. An extensive system of city and suburban
parks, connected by a series of beautiful drives, adds to the city's
attractiveness. There are great forests in the vicinity. Among the
public buildings are the city hall, the court house, the Federal
building, the public library and an auditorium. In or near Asheville are
a normal and collegiate institute for young women (1892), and, occupying
the same campus, a home industrial school (1887) for girls, both under
the control of the Woman's Board of Home Missions of the Presbyterian
Church; the Asheville farm school for boys, an industrial school for
negroes; the Asheville school for boys (5 m. west of Asheville); and the
Bingham school (1793), founded at Pittsboro, N.C., by William Bingham
(d. 1826), and removed to its present site (3 m. north-west of
Asheville) in 1891. About 2 m. south-east of the city is Biltmore, the
estate of George W. Vanderbilt, its 125,000 acres constituting what is
probably the finest country place in the United States. The central
feature of the estate is a château (375 × 150 ft.) of French Renaissance
design, after the famous château at Blois, France. In the neighbourhood
is a model village, with an elementary school, an industrial school for
whites, a hospital and a church, maintained by Mr Vanderbilt. Both the
château and the village were designed by Richard M. Hunt; the landscape
gardening was done by Frederick Law Olmsted. A collection of woody
plants, one of the largest and finest in the world, and a broad forest
and hunting preserve, known as Pisgah Forest (100,000 acres), are also
maintained by the owner. Asheville is a market for live-stock, dairy
products, lumber and fruits, and has various manufactories (in which a
good water-power is utilized), including tanneries, cotton mills, brick
and tile factories, and a wood-working and veneer plant. The value of
the city's factory products increased from $1,300,698 in 1900 to
$1,918,362 in 1905, or 47.5%. The city was named in honour of Samuel
Ashe (1725-1813), chief-justice of North Carolina from 1777 to 1796, and
John Ashe (1720-1781), a North Carolina soldier who distinguished
himself in the War of Independence, was settled about 1790, and was
incorporated in 1835. The city's boundaries were enlarged in 1905.