ASHLAND, a city and the county-seat of Ashland county, Wisconsin,
U.S.A., situated about 315 m. N.W. of Milwaukee, and about 70 m. E. of
Superior and Duluth, in the N. part of the state, at the head of
Chequamegon Bay, an arm of Lake Superior. Pop. (1890) 9956; (1900)
13,074, of whom 4417 were foreign-born; (1910, census) 11,594. It is
served by the Chicago & North-Western, the Northern Pacific, the
Chicago, St Paul, Minneapolis & Omaha, and the Wisconsin Central
railways, and by several steamboat lines on the Great Lakes. The city is
attractively situated, has a dry, healthful climate, and is a summer
resort. It has a fine Federal building, one of the best high-school
buildings in Wisconsin, the Vaughn public library (1895), a Roman
Catholic hospital, and the Rinehart hospital, and is the seat of the
Northland College and Academy (Congregational). Ashland has an excellent
harbour, has large iron-ore and coal docks, and is the principal port
for the shipment of iron ore from the rich Gogebic Range, the annual ore
shipment approximating 3,500,000 tons, valued at $12,000,000, and it has
also an extensive export trade in lumber. Brownstone quarried in the
vicinity is also an important export. The lake trade amounts to more
than $35,000,000 annually. Ashland has large saw-mills, iron and steel
rolling mills, foundries and machine shops, railway repair shops (of the
Chicago & North-Western railway), knitting works, and manufactories of
dynamite, sulphite fibre, charcoal and wood-alcohol. In 1905 its total
factory product was valued at $4,210,265. Settled about 1854, Ashland
was incorporated as a village in 1863 and received a city charter in
1887.