ASHTABULA, a city of Ashtabula county, Ohio, U.S.A., in Ashtabula
township, on the Ashtabula river and Lake Erie, and 54 m. N.E. of
Cleveland. Pop. (1890) 8338; (1900) 12,949, of whom 3688 were
foreign-born; (1910, census) 18,266. There is a large Finnish-born
population in the city and in Ashtabula county, and the _Amerikan
Sanomat_, established here in 1897, is one of the most widely read
Finnish weeklies in the country. Ashtabula is served by the
Pennsylvania, the Lake Shore & Michigan Southern, and the New York,
Chicago & St Louis railways, and by inter-urban electric lines. The city
is built on the high bank of the river about 75 ft. above the lake, and
commands good views of diversified scenery. There is a public library.
Ashtabula has an excellent harbour, to and from which large quantities
of iron ore and coal are shipped. More iron ore is received at this port
annually than at any other port in the country, or, probably, in the
world; the ore is shipped thence by rail to Pittsburg, Youngstown and
other iron manufacturing centres. In 1907 the port received 7,542,149
gross tons of iron ore, and shipped 2,632,027 net tons of soft coal.
Among the city's manufactures are leather, worsted goods, agricultural
implements, and foundry and machine shop products; in 1905 the total
value of the factory product was $1,895,454, an increase of 114.3% in
five years. There are large green-houses in and near Ashtabula, and
quantities of lettuce, cucumbers and tomatoes are raised under glass and
shipped to Pittsburg and other large cities. The first settlement here
was made about 1801. Ashtabula township was created in 1808, and from it
the townships of Kingsville, Plymouth and Sheffield have subsequently
been formed. The village of Ashtabula was incorporated in 1831, and
received a city charter in 1891. The name _Ashtabula_ is an Indian word
first applied to the river and said to mean "fish river."