ASIA, the name of one of the great continents into which the earth's
surface is divided, embracing the north-eastern portion of the great
mass of land which constitutes what is generally known as the Old World,
of which Europe forms the north-western and Africa the south-western
region.

Much doubt attaches to the origin of the name. Some of the earliest
Greek geographers divided their known world into two portions only,
Europe and Asia, in which last Libya (the Greek name for Africa) was
included. Herodotus, who ranks Libya as one of the chief divisions of
the world, separating it from Asia, repudiates as fables the ordinary
explanations assigned to the names Europe and Asia, but confesses his
inability to say whence they came. It would appear probable, however,
that the former of these words was derived from an Assyrian or Hebrew
root, which signifies the west or setting sun, and the latter from a
corresponding root meaning the east or rising sun, and that they were
used at one time to imply the west and the east. There is ground also
for supposing that they may at first have been used with a specific or
restricted local application, a more extended signification having
eventually been given to them. After the word Asia had acquired its
larger sense, it was still specially used by the Greeks to designate the
country around Ephesus. The idea of Asia as originally formed was
necessarily indefinite, and long continued to be so; and the area to
which the name was finally applied, as geographical knowledge increased,
was to a great extent determined by arbitrary and not very precise
conceptions, rather than on the basis of natural relations and
differences subsisting between it and the surrounding regions.

GEOGRAPHY

  Boundaries.

The northern boundary of Asia is formed by the Arctic Ocean; the
coast-line falls between 70° and 75° N., and so lies within the Arctic
circle, having its extreme northern point in Cape Sivero-Vostochnyi
(i.e. north-east) or Chelyuskin, in 78° N. On the south the coast-line
is far more irregular, the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal, and the China
Sea reaching about to the northern tropic at the mouths of the Indus, of
the Ganges and of the Canton river; while the great peninsulas of
Arabia, Hindostan and Cambodia descend to about 10° N., and the Malay
peninsula extends within a degree and a half of the equator. On the west
the extreme point of Asia is found on the shore of the Mediterranean, at
Cape Baba, in 26° E., nor far from the Dardanelles. Thence the boundary
passes in the one direction through the Mediterranean, and down the Red
Sea to the southern point of Arabia, at the strait of Bab-el-Mandeb, in
45° E.; and in the other through the Black Sea, and along the range of
Caucasus, following approximately 40° N. to the Caspian, whence it turns
to the north on a line not far from the 60th meridian, along the Ural
Mountains, and meets the Arctic Ocean nearly opposite the island of
Novaya Zemlya. The most easterly point of Asia is East Cape (Vostochnyi,
i.e. east, or Dezhnev), in 190° E., at the entrance of Bering Strait.
The boundary between this point and the extremity of the Malay Peninsula
follows the coast of the Northern Pacific and the China Sea, on a line
deeply broken by the projection of the peninsulas of Kamchatka and
Korea, and the recession of the Sea of Okhotsk, the Yellow Sea, and the
Gulfs of Tongking and Siam.

  Islands.

On the east and south-east of Asia are several important groups of
islands, the more southern of which link this continent to Australia,
and to the islands of the Pacific. The Kurile islands, the Japanese
group, Luchu, Formosa and the Philippines, may be regarded as
unquestionable outliers of Asia. Between the islands of the Malay
archipelago from Sumatra to New Guinea, and the neighbouring Asiatic
continent, no definite relations appear ever to have existed, and no
distinctly marked boundary for Asia has been established by the old
geographers in this quarter. Modern science, however, has indicated a
line of physical separation along the channel between Borneo and
Celebes, called the Straits of Macassar, which follows approximately
120° E., to the west of which the flora and fauna are essentially
Asiatic in their type, while to the south and east the Australian
element begins to be distinctly marked, soon to become predominant. To
this boundary has been given the name of Wallace's line, after the
eminent naturalist, A.R. Wallace, who first indicated its existence.

  Form of continent.

Owing to the great extent of Asia, it is not easy to obtain a correct
conception of the actual form of its outline from ordinary maps, the
distortions which accompany projections of large spherical areas on a
flat surface being necessarily great and misleading. Turning, therefore,
to a globe, Asia, viewed as a whole, will be seen to have the form of a
great isosceles spherical triangle, having its north-eastern apex at
East Cape (Vostochnyi), in Bering Strait; its two equal sides, in length
about a quadrant of the sphere, or 6500 m., extending on the west to the
southern point of Arabia, and on the east to the extremity of the Malay
peninsula; and the base between these points occupying about 60° of a
great circle, or 4500 m., and being deeply indented by the Arabian Sea
and the Bay of Bengal on either side of the Indian peninsula. A great
circle, drawn through East Cape and the southern point of Arabia, passes
nearly along the coast-line of the Arctic Ocean, over the Ural
Mountains, through the western part of the Caspian, and nearly along the
boundary between Persia and Asiatic Turkey. Asia Minor and the
north-western half of Arabia lie outside such a great circle, which
otherwise indicates, with fair accuracy, the north-western boundary of
Asia. In like manner a great circle drawn through East Cape and the
extremity of the Malay peninsula, passes nearly over the coasts of
Manchuria, China and Cochin-China, and departs comparatively little from
the eastern boundary.

    General physiography.

  Asia is divided laterally along the parallel of 40° north by a
  depression which, beginning on the east of the desert of Gobi, extends
  westwards through Mongolia to Chinese Turkestan. To the west of
  Kashgar the central depression is limited by the meridional range of
  Sarikol and the great elevation of the Pamir, of which the Sarikol is
  the eastern face. The level of this depression (once a vast inland
  sea) between the mountains which enclose the sources of the Hwang-ho
  and the Sarikol range probably never exceeds 2000 ft. above sea, and
  modern researches tend to prove that in the central portions of the
  Gobi (about Lop Nor) it may be actually below sea-level. A vast
  proportion of the continent north of this central line is but a few
  hundred feet in altitude. Shelving gradually upward from the low flats
  of Siberia the general continental level rises to a great central
  water-parting, or divide, which stretches from the Black Sea through
  the Elburz and the Hindu Kush to the Tian-shan mountains in the Pamir
  region, and hence to Bering Strait on the extreme north-east. This
  great divide is not always marked by well-defined ranges facing
  steeply either to the north or south. There are considerable spaces
  where the strike, or axis, of the main ranges is transverse to the
  water-parting, which is then represented by intermediate highlands
  forming lacustrine regions with an indefinite watershed. Only a part
  of this great continental divide (including such ranges as the Hindu
  Kush, Tian-shan, Altai or Khangai) rises to any great height, a
  considerable portion of it being below 5000 ft. in altitude. South of
  the divide the level at once drops to the central depression of Gobi,
  which forms a vast interior, almost waterless space, where the local
  drainage is lost in deserts or swamps. South of this enclosed
  depression is another great hydrographic barrier which parts it from
  the low plains of the Amur, of China, Siam and India, bordered by the
  shallows of the Yellow Sea and the shoals which enclose the islands of
  Japan and Formosa, all of them once an integral part of the continent.
  This second barrier is one of the most mighty upheavals in the world,
  by reason both of its extent and its altitude. Starting from the Amur
  river and reaching along the eastern margin of the Gobi desert towards
  the sources of the Hwang-ho, it merges into the Altyn-tagh and the
  Kuen-lun, forming the northern face of the vast Tibetan highlands
  which are bounded on the south by the Himalaya. The Pamir highlands
  between the base of the Tian-shan mountains and the eastern buttresses
  of the Hindu Kush unite these two great divides, enclosing the Gobi
  depression on the west; and they would again be united on the east but
  for the transverse valley of the Amur, which parts the Khingan
  mountains from the Yablonoi system to the east of Lake Baikal.

  If we consider the whole continent to be divided into three sections,
  viz. a northern section with an average altitude of less than 5000 ft.
  above sea, where all the main rivers flow northward to the
  Mediterranean, the Arctic Sea, or the Caspian; a central section of
  depression, where the drainage is lost in swamps or _hamuns_, and of
  which the average level probably does not exceed 2000 ft. above sea;
  and a southern section divided between highly elevated table-lands
  from 15,000 to 16,000 ft. in altitude, and lowlands of the Arabian,
  Indian, Siamese and Chinese peninsulas, with an ocean outlet for its
  drainage; we find that there is only one direct connexion between
  northern and southern sections which involves no mountain passes, and
  no formidable barrier of altitudes. That one is afforded by the narrow
  valley of the Hari Rud to the west of Herat. From the Caspian to
  Karachi it is possible to pass without encountering any orographic
  obstacle greater than the divide which separates the valley of the
  Hari Rud from the Helmund _hamun_ basin, which may be represented by
  an altitude of about 4000 ft. above sea-level. This fact possesses
  great significance in connexion with the development of Asiatic
  railways.

    Hydrography.

  If we examine the hydrographic basins of the three divisions of Asia
  thus indicated we find that the northern division, including the
  drainage falling into the Arctic Sea, the Aralo-Caspian depression, or
  the Mediterranean, embraces an area of about 6,394,500 sq. m., as
  follows:--

                                      Sq. m.
    Area of Arctic river basins    4,367,000
       "    Aralo-Caspian basin    1,759,000
       "    Mediterranean            268,500
                                   ---------
                      Total        6,394,500

  The southern division is nearly equal in extent--

                                      Sq. m.
    Pacific drainage               3,641,000
    Indian Ocean                   2,873,000
                                   ---------
                      Total        6,514,000

  The interior or inland basins, including the lacustrine regions south
  of the Arctic watershed, the Gobi depression, Tibetan plateau, the
  Iranian (or Perso-Afghan) uplands, the Syro-Arabian inland basin, and
  that of Asia Minor, amount to 3,141,500 sq. m. or about half the
  extent of the other two.

  By far the largest Asiatic river basin is that of the Ob, which
  exceeds 1,000,000 sq. m. in extent. On the east and south the Amur
  embraces no less than 776,000 sq. m., the Yang-tsze-kiang including
  685,000, the Ganges 409,500, and the Indus 370,000 sq. m.[1]

  The lakes of Asia are innumerable, and vary in size from an inland sea
  (such as Lakes Baikal and Balkash) to a highland loch, or the
  indefinitely extended swamps of Persia. Many of them are at high
  elevations (Lake Victoria, 13,400 ft., being probably the most
  elevated), and are undoubted vestiges of an ancient period of
  glaciation. Such lakes, as a rule, show indications of a gradual
  decrease in size. Others are relics of an earlier geological period,
  when land areas recently upheaved from the sea were spread at low
  levels with alternate inundations of salt and fresh water. Of these
  Lop Nor and the Helmund _hamuns_ are typical. Such lakes (in common
  with all the plateau _hamuns_ of south-west Baluchistan and Persia)
  change their form and extent from season to season, and many of them
  are impregnated with saline deposits from the underlying strata. The
  _kavirs_, or salt depressions, of the Persian desert are more
  frequently widespread deposits of mud and salt than water-covered
  areas.

    Political divisions.

  Although for the purposes of geographical nomenclature, boundaries
  formed by a coast-line--that is, by depressions of the earth's solid
  crust _below_ the ocean level--are most easily recognized and are of
  special convenience; and although such boundaries, from following
  lines on which the continuity of the land is interrupted, often
  necessarily indicate important differences in the conditions of
  adjoining countries, and of their political and physical relations,
  yet variations of the elevation of the surface _above_ the sea-level
  frequently produce effects not less marked. The changes of temperature
  and climate caused by difference of elevation are quite comparable in
  their magnitude and effect on all organized creatures with those due
  to differences of latitude; and the relative position of the high and
  low lands on the earth's surface, by modifying the direction of the
  winds, the fall of rain, and other atmospheric phenomena, produce
  effects in no sense less important than those due to the relative
  distribution of the land and sea. Hence the study of the mountain
  ranges of a continent is, for a proper apprehension of its physical
  conditions and characteristics, as essential as the examination of its
  extent and position in relation to the equator and poles, and the
  configuration of its coasts.

    Himalayan boundary.

  From such causes the physical conditions of a large part of Asia, and
  the history of its population, have been very greatly influenced by
  the occurrence of the mass of mountain above described, which includes
  the Himalaya and the whole elevated area having true physical
  connexion with that range, and occupies an area about 2000 m. in
  length and varying from 100 to 500 m. in width, between 65° and 100°
  east and between 28° and 35° north. These mountains, which include the
  highest peaks in the world, rise, along their entire length, far above
  the line of perpetual snow, and few of the passes across the main
  ridges are at a less altitude than 15,000 or 16,000 ft. above the sea.
  Peaks of 20,000 ft. abound along the whole chain, and the points that
  exceed that elevation are numerous. A mountain range such as this,
  attaining altitudes at which vegetable life ceases, and the support of
  animal life is extremely difficult, constitutes an almost impassable
  barrier against the spread of all forms of living creatures. The
  mountain mass, moreover, is not less important in causing a complete
  separation between the atmospheric conditions on its opposite flanks,
  by reason of the extent to which it penetrates that stratum of the
  atmosphere which is in contact with the earth's surface and is
  effective in determining climate. The highest summits create serious
  obstructions to the movements of nearly three-fourths of the mass of
  the air resting on this part of the earth, and of nearly the whole of
  the moisture it contains; the average height of the entire chain is
  such as to make it an almost absolute barrier to one-half of the air
  and three-fourths of the moisture; while the lower ranges also produce
  important atmospheric effects, one-fourth of the air and one-half of
  the watery vapour it carries with it lying below 9000 ft.

  This great mass of mountain, constituting as it does a complete
  natural line of division across a large part of the continent, will
  form a convenient basis from which to work, in proceeding, as will now
  be done, to give a general view of the principal countries contained
  in Asia.

    Tibet.

  The summit of the great mountain mass is occupied by Tibet, a country
  known by its inhabitants under the name of _Bod_ or _Bodyul_. Tibet is
  a rugged table-land, narrow as compared with its length, broken up by
  a succession of mountain ranges, which follow as a rule the direction
  of the length of the table-land, and commonly rise into the regions of
  perpetual snow; between the flanks of these lie valleys, closely
  hemmed in, usually narrow, having a very moderate inclination, but at
  intervals opening out into wide plains, and occupied either by rivers,
  or frequently by lakes from which there is no outflow and the waters
  of which are salt. The eastern termination of Tibet is in the line of
  snowy mountains which flanks China on the west, between the 27th and
  35th parallels of latitude, and about 103° east. On the west the
  table-land is prolonged beyond the political limits of Tibet, though
  with much the same physical features, to about 70° east, beyond which
  it terminates; and the ranges which are covered with perpetual snow as
  far west as Samarkand, thence rapidly diminish in height, and
  terminate in low hills north of Bokhara.

  The mean elevation of Tibet may be taken as 15,000 ft. above the sea.
  The broad mountainous slope by which it is connected with the lower
  levels of Hindostan contains the ranges known as the Himalaya; the
  name Kuen-lun is generally applied to the northern slope that descends
  to the central plains of the Gobi, though these mountains are not
  locally known under those names, Kuen-lun being apparently a Chinese
  designation.

  The extreme rigour of the climate of Tibet, which combines great cold
  with great drought, makes the country essentially very poor, and the
  chief portion of it little better than desert. The vegetation is
  everywhere most scanty, and scarcely anything deserving the name of a
  tree is to be found unless in the more sheltered spots, and then
  artificially planted. The population in the lower and warmer valleys
  live in houses, and follow agriculture; in the higher regions they are
  nomadic shepherds, thinly scattered over a large area.

    China.

  China lies between the eastern flank of the Tibetan plateau and the
  North Pacific, having its northern and southern limits about on 40°
  and 20° N. respectively. The country, though generally broken up with
  mountains of moderate elevation, possesses none of very great
  importance apart from those of its western border. It is well watered,
  populous, and, as a rule, highly cultivated, fertile, and well wooded;
  the climate is analogous to that of southern Europe, with hot summers,
  and winters everywhere cold and in the north decidedly severe.

    Indo-Chinese region.

  From the eastern extremity of the Tibetan mountains, between the 95th
  and 100th meridians, high ranges extend from about 35° N. in a
  southerly direction, which, spreading outwards as they go south, reach
  the sea at various points in Cochin-China, the Malay peninsula, and
  the east flank of Bengal. Between these ranges, which are probably
  permanently snowy to about 27° N., flow the great rivers of the
  Indo-Chinese peninsula, the Mekong, the Menam, the Salween, and the
  Irrawaddy, the valleys of which form the main portions of the states
  of Cochin-China (including Tongking and Cambodia), of Siam (including
  Laos) and of Burma. The people of Cochin-China are called Anam; it is
  probably from a corruption of their name for the capital of Tongking,
  Kechao, that the Portuguese Cochin has been derived. All these
  countries are well watered, populous and fertile, with a climate very
  similar to that of eastern Bengal. The geography of the region in
  which the mountains of Cochin-China and Siam join Tibet is still
  imperfectly known, but there is no ground left for doubting that the
  great river of eastern Tibet, the Tsanpo, supplies the main stream of
  the Brahmaputra. The two great rivers of China, the Hwang-ho and the
  Yang-tsze-kiang take their rise from the eastern face of Tibet, the
  former from the north-east angle, the latter from the south-east. The
  main stream of this last is called Dichu in Tibet, and its chief
  feeder is the Ya-lung-kiang, which rises not far from the Hwang-ho,
  and is considered the territorial boundary between China and Tibet.

    British India.

  British India comprises approximately the area between the 95th and
  70th meridians, and between the Tibetan table-land and the Indian
  Ocean. The Indian peninsula from 25° N. southwards is a table-land,
  having its greatest elevation on the west, where the highest points
  rise to over 8000 ft., though the ordinary altitude of the higher
  hills hardly exceeds 4000 ft.; the general level of the table-land
  lies between 3000 ft. as a maximum and 1000 ft.

  From the delta of the Ganges and Brahmaputra on the east to that of
  the Indus on the west, and intervening between the table-land of the
  peninsula and the foot of the Himalayan slope of the Tibetan plateau,
  lies the great plain of northern India, which rises at its highest
  point to about 1000 ft., and includes altogether, with its
  prolongation up the valley of Assam, an area of about 500,000 sq. m.,
  comprising the richest, the most populous and most civilized districts
  of India. The great plain extends, with an almost unbroken surface,
  from the most western to the most eastern extremity of British India,
  and is composed of deposits so finely comminuted, that it is no
  exaggeration to say that it is possible to go from the Bay of Bengal
  up the Ganges, through the Punjab, and down the Indus again to the
  sea, over a distance of 2000 m. and more, without finding a pebble,
  however small.

  The great rivers of northern India--the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and
  the Indus--all derive their waters from the Tibetan mountain mass; and
  it is a remarkable circumstance that the northern water-parting of
  India should lie to the north of the Himalaya in the regions of
  central Tibet.

  The population of India is very large, some of its districts being
  among the most densely peopled in the world. The country is generally
  well cleared, and forests are, as a rule, found only along the flanks
  of the mountains, where the fall of rain is most abundant. The more
  open parts are highly cultivated, and large cities abound. The climate
  is generally such as to secure the population the necessaries of life
  without severe labour; the extremes of heat and drought are such as to
  render the land unsuitable for pasture, and the people everywhere
  subsist by cultivation of the soil or commerce, and live in settled
  villages or towns.

  The island of Ceylon is distinguished from the neighbouring parts of
  British India by little more than its separate administration and the
  Buddhistic religion of its population. The highest point in Ceylon
  rises to about 9000 ft. above the sea, and the mountain slopes are
  densely covered with forest. The lower levels are in climate and
  cultivation quite similar to the regions in the same latitude on the
  Malay peninsula.

  Of the islands in the Bay of Bengal the Nicobar and Andaman groups are
  alone worth notice. They are placed on a line joining the north end of
  Sumatra and Cape Negrais, the south-western extremity of Burma. They
  possibly owe their existence to the volcanic agencies which are known
  to extend from Sumatra across this part of the Indian Ocean.

  [Illustration: map of Asia.]

  The Laccadives and Maldives are groups of small coral islands,
  situated along the 73rd meridian at no great distance from the
  Indian peninsula on which they have a political dependency.

    The Nearer East.

  The portion of Asia west of British India excluding Arabia and Syria
  forms another extensive plateau covering an area as large as that of
  Tibet though at a much lower altitude. Its southern border runs along
  the Arabian Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Tigris and thence westward to
  the north-east angle of the Levant, on the north the high land follows
  nearly 36° N. to the southern shore of the Caspian and thence to the
  Black Sea and Sea of Marmora. Afghanistan, Baluchistan, Iran or
  Persia, Armenia and the provinces of Asia Minor occupy this high
  region with which they are nearly conterminous. The eastern flank of
  this table-land follows a line of hills drawn a short distance from
  the Indus between the mouth of that river and the Himalaya, about on
  the 72nd meridian, these hills do not generally exceed 4000 or 5000
  ft. in elevation but a few of the summits reach 10,000 ft. or more.
  The southern and south western face follows the coast closely up the
  Persian Gulf from the mouth of the Indus, and is formed farther west
  by the mountain scarp, which, rising in many points to 10,000 ft.
  flanks the Tigris and the Mesopotamian plains, and extends along
  Kurdistan and Armenia nearly to the 40th meridian, beyond which it
  turns along the Taurus range, and the north eastern angle of the
  Mediterranean. The north eastern portion of the Afghan table-land
  abuts on the Himalaya and Tibet, with which it forms a continuous mass
  of mountain between the 71st and 72nd meridians and 34° and 36° N.
  From the point of intersection of the 71st meridian with the 36th
  parallel of latitude, an unbroken range of mountain stretches on one
  side towards the north east, up to the crest of the northern slope of
  the Tibetan plateau, and on the other nearly due west as far as the
  Caspian. The north eastern portion of this range is of great altitude,
  and separates the headwaters of the Oxus, which run off to the Aral
  Sea, from those of the Indus and its Kabul tributary, which, uniting
  below Peshawar are thence discharged southward into the Arabian Sea.
  The western part of the range, which received the name of Paropamisus
  Mons from the ancients, diminishes in height west of the 65th meridian
  and constitutes the northern face of the Afghan and Persian plateau
  rising abruptly from the plains of the Turkoman desert which lies
  between the Oxus and the Caspian. These mountains at some points
  attain a height of 10,000 or 12,000 ft. Along the south coast of the
  Caspian this line of elevation is prolonged as the Elburz range (not
  to be confused with the Elburz of the Caucasus), and has its
  culminating point in Demavend, which rises to 19,400 ft. above the sea
  thence it extends to the north west to Ararat, which rises to upwards
  of 17,000 ft. from the vicinity of which the Euphrates flows off to
  the south west across the high lands of Armenia. Below the north east
  declivity of this range lies Georgia, on the other side of which
  province rises the Caucasus, the boundary of Asia and Europe between
  the Caspian and Black Seas, the highest points of which reach an
  elevation of nearly 19,000 ft. West of Ararat high hills extend along
  the Black Sea between which and the Taurus range lies the plateau of
  Asia Minor reaching to the Aegean Sea, the mountains along the Black
  Sea, on which are the Olympus and Ida of the ancients rise to 6000 or
  7000 ft., the Taurus is more lofty--reaching 8000 and 10,000 ft.--both
  ranges decline in altitude as they approach the Mediterranean.

  This great plateau extending from the Mediterranean to the Indus has a
  length of about 2500 m. from east to west, and a breadth of upwards of
  600 m. on the west and nowhere of less than 250 m. It lies generally
  at altitudes between 2000 ft. and 8000 ft. above the sea level. Viewed
  as a whole the eastern half of this region, comprising Persia,
  Afghanistan and Baluchistan, is poor and unproductive. The climate is
  very severe in the winter and extremely hot in summer. The rainfall is
  very scanty, and running waters are hardly known excepting among the
  mountains which form the scarps of the elevated country. The
  population is sparse, frequently nomadic, and addicted to plunder,
  progress in the arts and habits of civilization is small. The western
  part of the area falls within the Turkish empire. Its climate is less
  hot and and its natural productiveness much greater and its population
  more settled and on the whole more advanced.

    Arabia.

  The peninsula of Arabia with Syria, its continuation to the
  north-west, has some of the characteristics of the hottest and driest
  parts Persia and Baluchistan. Excepting the northern part of this
  tract which is conterminous with the plain of Mesopotamia (which at
  its highest point reaches an elevation of about 700 ft. above the sea)
  the country is covered with low mountains, rising to 3000 or 4000 ft.
  in altitude having among them narrow valleys in which the vegetation
  is scanty with exceptional regions of greater fertility in the
  neighbourhood of the coasts where the rainfall is greatest. In
  northern Syria the mountains of Lebanon rise to about 10,000 ft. and
  with a more copious water supply the country becomes more productive.
  The whole tract, excepting south eastern Arabia is nominally subject
  to Turkey but the people are to no small extent practically
  independent living a nomadic pastoral and freebooting life under petty
  chiefs in the more arid districts, but settled in towns in the more
  fertile tracts where agriculture becomes more profitable and external
  commerce is established.

    Trans-Caspian region and central Asia.

  The area between the northern border of the Persian high lands and the
  Caspian and Aral Seas is a nearly desert low lying plain, extending to
  the foot of the north-western extremity of the great Tibeto-Himalayan
  mountains and prolonged eastward up the valleys of the Oxus (Amu
  Darya) and Jaxartes (Syr-Darya), and northward across the country of
  the Kirghiz to the south western border of Siberia. It includes
  Bokhara, Khiva and Turkestan proper in which the Uzbeg Turks are
  dominant, and for the most part is inhabited by nomadic tribes, who
  are marauders, enjoying the reputation of being the worst among a race
  of professed robbers. The tribes to the north, subject to Russia, are
  naturally more peaceable, and have been brought into some degree of
  discipline. In this tract the rainfall is nowhere sufficient for the
  purposes of agriculture, which is only possible by help of irrigation,
  and the fixed population (which contains a non-Turkish element) is
  comparatively small, and restricted to the towns and the districts
  near the rivers.

  The north-western extremity of the elevated Tibeto-Himalayan mountain
  plateau is situated about on 73° E. and 39° N. This region is known as
  Pamir, it has all the characteristics of the highest regions of Tibet,
  and so far fitly receives the Russian designation of steppe, but it
  seems to have no special peculiarities, and the reason of its having
  been so long regarded as a geographical enigma is not obvious. From it
  the Oxus, or Amu, flows off to the west, and the Jaxartes, or Syr, to
  the north, through the Turki state of Khokand, while to the east the
  waters run down past Kashgar to the central desert of the Gobi,
  uniting with the streams from the northern slope of the Tibetan
  plateau that traverse the principalities of Yarkand and Khotan, which
  are also Turki. Here the Tibetan mountains unite with the line of
  elevation which stretches across the continent from the Pacific, and
  which separates Siberia from the region commonly spoken of under the
  name of central Asia.

    Manchuria.

  A range of mountains, called Stanovor, rising to heights of 4000 or
  5000 ft., follows the southern coast of the eastern extremity of Asia
  from Kamchatka to the borders of Manchuria, as far as the 135th
  meridian, in lat. 55° N. Thence the Yablonoi range, continuing in the
  same direction, divides the waters of the river Lena, which flows
  through Siberia into the Arctic Sea, from those of the river Amur,
  which falls into the North Pacific, the basin of this river, with its
  affluents, constitutes Manchuria. From the north of Manchuria the
  Khingan range stretches southward to the Chinese frontier near Peking,
  east of which the drainage falls into the Amur and the Yellow Sea,
  while to the west is an almost rainless region, the inclination of
  which is towards the central area of the continent, Mongolia.

    Mongolia.

  From the western end of the Yablonoi range, on the 115th meridian, a
  mountainous belt extends along a somewhat irregular line to the
  extremity of Pamir, known under various names in its different parts,
  and broken up into several branches, enclosing among them many
  isolated drainage areas, from which there is no outflow, and within
  which numerous lakes are formed. The most important of these ranges is
  the Tian-shan or Celestial Mountains, which form the northern boundary
  of the Gobi desert, they lie between 40° and 43° N., and between 75°
  and 95° E., and some of the summits are said to exceed 20,000 ft. in
  altitude, along the foot of this range are the principal cultivated
  districts of central Asia, and here too are situated the few towns
  which have sprung up in this barren and thinly peopled region. Next
  may be named the Ala-tau, on the prolongation of the Tian-shan,
  flanking the Syr on the north, and rising to 14,000 or 15,000 ft. It
  forms the barrier between the Issyk-kul and Balkash lakes, the
  elevation of which is about 5000 ft. Last is the Altai, near the 50th
  parallel, rising to 10,000 or 12,000 ft., which separates the waters
  of the great rivers of western Siberia from those that collect into
  the lakes of north-west Mongolia, Dzungaria and Kalka. A line of
  elevation is continued west of the Altai to the Ural Mountains, not
  rising to considerable altitudes; this divides the drainage of
  south-west Siberia from the great plains lying north east of the Aral
  Sea.

  The central area bounded on the north and north-west by the Yablonoi
  Mountains and their western extension in the Tian-shan, on the south
  by the northern face of the Tibetan plateau and on the east by the
  Khingan range before alluded to, forms the great desert of central
  Asia, known as the Gobi. Its eastern part is nearly conterminous with
  south Mongolia, its western forms Chinese or eastern Turkestan. It
  appears likely that no part of this great central Asiatic desert is
  less than 2000 ft. above the sea level. The elevation of the plain
  about Kashgar and Yarkand is from 4000 to 6000 ft. The more northern
  parts of Mongolia are between 4000 and 6000 ft., and no portion of the
  route across the desert between the Chinese frontier and Kiakhta is
  below 3000 ft. The precise positions of the mountain ridges that
  traverse this central area are not properly known, their elevation is
  everywhere considerable, and many points are known to exceed 10,000 or
  12,000 ft.

  In Mongolia the population is essentially nomadic, its wealth
  consisting in herds of horned cattle, sheep, horses and camels. The
  Turki tribes, occupying western Mongolia, are among the least
  civilized of human beings, and it is chiefly to their extreme
  barbarity and cruelty that our ignorance of central Asia is due. The
  climate is very severe, with great extremes of heat and cold. The
  drought is very great, rain falls rarely and in small quantities. The
  surface is for the most part a hard stony desert, areas of blown sand
  occurring but exceptionally. There are few towns or settled villages,
  except along the slopes of the higher mountains, on which the rain
  falls more abundantly, or the melting snow supplies streams for
  irrigation. It is only in such situations that cultivated lands are
  found, and beyond them trees are hardly to be seen.

    Siberia.

  The portion of Asia which lies between the Arctic Ocean and the
  mountainous belt bounding Manchuria, Mongolia and Turkestan on the
  north is Siberia. It includes an immense high and broken plateau which
  spreads from south-west to north-east, losing in width and altitude as
  it advances north-east. It is fringed on either side by high border
  ridges, which subside on the north-west into a stretch of high plains,
  1500 to 2000 ft. high, finally dropping to lowlands a few hundred feet
  above sea-level. The extremes of heat and cold are very great. The
  rainfall, though not heavy, is sufficient to maintain such vegetation
  as is compatible with the conditions of temperature, and the surface
  is often swampy or peaty. The mountain-sides are commonly clothed with
  pine forests, and the plains with grasses or shrubs. The population is
  very scanty; the cultivated tracts are comparatively small in extent
  and restricted to the more settled districts. The towns are entirely
  Russian. The indigenous races are nomadic Mongols, of a peaceful
  character, but in a very backward state of civilization. The Ural
  Mountains do not exceed 2000 or 3000 ft. in average altitude, the
  highest summits not exceeding 6000 ft., and one of the passes being as
  low as 1400 ft. In the southern half of the range are the chief mining
  districts of Russia. The Ob, Yenisei and Lena, which traverse Siberia,
  are among the largest rivers in the world.

    Malay Archipelago.

  The southern group of the Malay Archipelago, from Sumatra to Java and
  Timor, extends in the arc of a circle between 95° and 127° E., and
  from 5° to 10° S. The central part of the group is a volcanic region,
  many of the volcanoes being still active, the summits frequently
  rising to 10,000 ft. or more.

  Sumatra, the largest of the islands, is but thinly peopled; the
  greater part of the surface is covered with dense forest, the
  cultivated area being comparatively small, confined to the low lands,
  and chiefly in the volcanic region near the centre of the island. Java
  is the most thickly peopled, best cultivated and most advanced island
  of the whole Eastern archipelago. It has attained a high degree of
  wealth and prosperity under the Dutch government. The people are
  peaceful and industrious, and chiefly occupied with agriculture. The
  highest of the volcanic peaks rises to 12,000 ft. above the sea. The
  eastern islands of this group are less productive and less advanced.

  Borneo, the most western and the largest of the northern group of
  islands which extends between 110° and 150° E., as far as New Guinea
  or Papua, is but little known. The population is small, rude and
  uncivilized; and the surface is rough and mountainous and generally
  covered with forest except near the coast, to the alluvial lands on
  which settlers have been attracted from various surrounding countries.
  The highest mountain rises to nearly 14,000 ft., but the ordinary
  elevations do not exceed 4000 or 5000 ft.

  Of Celebes less is known than of Borneo, which it resembles in
  condition and natural characteristics. The highest known peaks rise to
  8000 ft., some of them being volcanic.

    Pacific Islands.

  New Guinea extends almost to the same meridian as the eastern coast of
  Australia, from the north point of which it is separated by Torres
  Straits. Very little is known of the interior. The mountains are said
  to rise to 20,000 ft., having the appearance of being permanently
  covered with snow; the surface seems generally to be clothed with
  thick wood. The inhabitants are of the Negrito type, with curly or
  crisp and bushy hair; those of the west coast have come more into
  communication with the traders of other islands and are fairly
  civilized. Eastward, many of the tribes are barbarous savages.

  The Philippine Islands lie between 5° and 20° N., between Borneo and
  southern China. The highest land does not rise to a greater height
  than 10,250 ft.; the climate is well suited for agriculture, and the
  islands generally are fertile and fairly cultivated, though not coming
  up to the standard of Java either in wealth or population.

  Formosa, which is situated under the northern tropic, near the coast
  of China, is traversed by a high range of mountains, reaching nearly
  13,000 ft. in elevation. On its western side, which is occupied by an
  immigrant Chinese population, are open and well-cultivated plains; on
  the east it is mountainous, and occupied by independent indigenous
  tribes in a less advanced state.

  The islands of Japan, not including Sakhalin, of which half is
  Japanese, lie between the 30th and 45th parallels. The whole group is
  traversed by a line of volcanic mountains, some of which are in
  activity, the highest point being about 13,000 ft. above the sea. The
  country is generally well watered, fertile and well cultivated. The
  Japanese people have added to their ancient civilization and their
  remarkable artistic faculty, an adaptation of Western methods, and a
  capacity for progress in war and commerce, which single them out among
  Eastern races as a great modern world-force.

  EXPLORATION

  The progress of geodetic surveys in Russia had long ago extended
  across the European half of the great empire, St Petersburg being
  connected with Tiflis on the southern slopes of the Caucasus by a
  direct system of triangulation carried out with the highest scientific
  precision. St Petersburg, again, is connected with Greenwich by
  European systems of triangulation; and the Greenwich meridian is
  adopted by Russia as the zero for all her longitude values. But beyond
  the eastern shores of the Caspian no system of direct geodetic
  measurements by first-class triangulation has been possible, and the
  surveys of Asiatic Russia are separated from those of Europe by the
  width of that inland sea. The arid nature of the trans-Caspian deserts
  has proved an insuperable obstacle to those rigorous methods of
  geodetic survey which distinguish Russian methods in Europe, so that
  Russian geography in central Asia is dependent on other means than
  that of direct measurement for the co-ordinate values in latitude and
  longitude for any given point. The astronomical observatory at
  Tashkent is adopted for the initial starting-point of the
  trans-Caspian triangulation of Russia; the triangulation ranks as
  second-class only, and now extends to the Pamir frontier beyond Osh.
  The longitude of the Tashkent observatory has been determined by
  telegraph differentially with Pulkova as follows:--

                                            H. M.    S.
    In 1875 via Ekaterinburg and Omsk       2  35  52.151
    "  1891  "  Saratov       "  Orenburg   2  35  52.228
    "  1895  "  Kiev          "  Baku       2  35  51.997

  With these three independent values, all falling within a range of
  0^S.25, it is improbable that the mean value has an error as large as
  0^S.10.

    Extent of exact surveys in Asia.

  Exact surveys in Russia, based upon triangulation, extend as far east
  as Chinese Turkestan in longitude about 75° E. of Greenwich. In India
  geodetic triangulation furnishes the basis for exact surveys as far
  east as the eastern boundaries of Burma in longitude about 100° E.

  The close of the 19th century witnessed the forging of the final links
  in the great geodetic triangulation of India, so far as the peninsula
  is concerned. Further geodetic connexion with the European systems
  remains to be accomplished. Since 1890 further and more rigorous
  application of the telegraphic method of determining longitudes
  differentially with Greenwich has resulted in a slight correction
  (amounting to about 2" of arc) to the previous determination by the
  same method through Suez. This last determination was effected through
  four arcs as follows:--

      I. Greenwich--Potsdam.
     II. Potsdam--Teheran.
    III. Teheran--Bushire.
     IV. Bushire--Karachi.

  Each arc was measured with every precaution and a multitude of
  observations. The only element of uncertainty was caused by the
  retardation of the current, which between Potsdam and Teheran (3000
  m.) took 0^S.20 to travel; but it is probable that the final value can
  be accepted as correct to within 0^S.05.

  The final result of this latest determination is to place the Madras
  observatory 2' 27" to the west of the position adopted for it on the
  strength of absolute astronomical determinations.

    Connexion between Russian and Indian surveys.

  But while we have yet to wait for that expansion of principal
  triangulation which will bring Asia into connexion with Europe by the
  direct process of earth measurement, a topographical connexion has
  been effected between Russian and Indian surveys which sufficiently
  proves that the deductive methods employed by both countries for the
  determination of the co-ordinate values of fixed points so far agree
  that, for all practical purposes of future Asiatic cartography, no
  difficulty in adjustment between Indian and Russian mapping need be
  apprehended.

    Extension of geographical surveys.

  In connexion with the Indian triangulation minor extensions carried
  out on systems involving more or less irregularity have been pushed
  outwards on all sides. They reach through Afghanistan and Baluchistan
  to the eastern districts of Persia, and along the coast of Makran to
  that of Arabia. They have long ago included the farther mountain peaks
  of Nepal, and they now branch outwards towards western China and into
  Siam. These far extensions furnish the basis for a vast amount of
  exploratory survey of a strictly geographical character, and they have
  contributed largely towards raising the standard of accuracy in
  Asiatic geographical surveys to a level which was deemed unattainable
  fifty years ago. There is yet a vast field open in Asia for this class
  of surveys. While at the close of the 19th century western Asia
  (exclusive of Arabia) may be said to have been freed from all
  geographical perplexity, China, Mongolia and eastern Siberia still
  include enormous areas of which geographical knowledge is in a
  primitive stage of nebulous uncertainty.

    Indian explorers.

  Of scientific geographical exploration in Asia (beyond the limits of
  actual surveys) the modern period has been so prolific that it is only
  possible to refer in barest outline to some of the principal
  expeditions, most of which have been directed either to the great
  elevated table-land of Tibet or to the central depression which exists
  to the north of it. In southern Tibet the trans-Himalayan explorations
  of the native surveyors attached to the Indian survey, notably Pundits
  Nain Singh and Krishna, added largely to our knowledge of the great
  plateau. Nain Singh explored the sources of the Indus and of the Upper
  Brahmaputra in the years 1865-1867; and in 1874-1875 he followed a
  line from the eastern frontiers of Kashmir to the Tengri Nor lake and
  thence to Lhasa, in which city he remained for some months. Krishna's
  remarkable journey in 1879-1882 extended from Lhasa northwards through
  Tsaidam to Sachu, or Saitu, in Mongolia. He subsequently passed
  through eastern Tibet to the town of Darchendo, or Tachienlu, on the
  high road between Lhasa and Peking, and on the borders of China.
  Failing to reach India through Upper Assam he returned to the
  neighbourhood of Lhasa, and crossed the Himalayas by a more westerly
  route. Both these explorers visited Lhasa.

    Russian explorers.

  In 1871-1873 the great Russian explorer, Nicolai Prjevalsky, crossed
  the Gobi desert from the north to Kansu in western China. He first
  defined the geography of Tsaidam, and mapped the hydrography of that
  remarkable region, from which emanate the great rivers of China, Siam
  and Burma. He penetrated southwards to within a month's march of
  Lhasa. In 1876 he visited the Lop Nor and discovered the Altyn Tagh
  range. In 1879 he followed up the Urangi river to the Altai Mountains,
  and demonstrated to the world the extraordinary physical changes which
  have passed over the heart of the Asiatic continent since Jenghiz Khan
  massed his vast armies in those provinces. He crossed, and named, the
  Dzungarian extension of the Gobi desert, and then traversed the Gobi
  itself from Hami to Sachu, which became a point of junction between
  his journeys and those of Krishna. He visited the sources of the
  Hwang-ho (Yellow river) and the Salween, and then returned to Russia.
  His fourth journey in 1883-1885 was to Sining (the great trade centre
  of the Chinese borderland), and thence through northern Tibet
  (crossing the Altyn Tagh to Lop Nor), and by the Cherchen-Keriya trade
  route to Khotan. From Khotan he followed the Tarim to Aksu.

  Following Prjevalsky the Russian explorers, Pevtsov and Roborovski, in
  1889-1890 (and again in 1894), added greatly to our knowledge of the
  topography of western Chinese Turkestan and the northern borders of
  Tibet; all these Russian expeditions being conducted on scientific
  principles and yielding results of the highest value. Among other
  distinguished Russian explorers in Asia, the names of Lessar,
  Annentkov (who bridged the Trans-Caspian deserts by a railway), P.K.
  Kozlov and Potanin are conspicuous during the 19th century.

    Other explorations in central Asia.

  Although the establishment of a lucrative trade between India and
  central Asia had been the dream of many successive Indian viceroys,
  and much had been done towards improving the approaches to Simla from
  the north, very little was really known of the highlands of the
  Pamirs, or of the regions of the great central depression, before the
  mission of Sir Douglas Forsyth to Yarkand in 1870. Robert Barkley Shaw
  and George Hayward were the European pioneers of geography into the
  central dominion of Kashgar, arriving at Yarkand within a few weeks of
  each other in 1868. Shaw subsequently accompanied Forsyth's mission in
  1870, when Henry Trotter made the first maps of Chinese Turkestan. The
  next great accession to our knowledge of central Asiatic geography was
  gained with the Russo-Afghan Boundary Commission of 1884-1886, when
  Afghan Turkestan and the Oxus regions were mapped by Colonel Sir T.H.
  Holdich, Colonel St George Gore and Sir Adelbert Talbot; and when Ney
  Elias crossed from China through the Pamirs and Badakshan to the camp
  of the commission, identifying the great "Dragon Lake," Rangkul, on
  his way. About the same time a mission, under Captain (afterwards Sir
  Willaim) Lockhart, crossed the Hindu Kush into Wakhan, and returned to
  India by the Bashgol valley of Kafiristan. This was Colonel
  Woodthorpe's opportunity, and he was then enabled to verify the
  results of W.W. M'Nair's previous explorations, and to determine the
  conformation of the Hindu Kush. In 1885 Arthur Douglas Carey and
  Andrew Dalgleish, following more or less the tracks of Prjevalsky,
  contributed much that was new to the map of Asia; and in 1886 Captain
  (afterwards Sir Francis) Younghusband completed a most adventurous
  journey across the heart of the continent by crossing the Muztagh, the
  great mountain barrier between China and Kashmir.

    Tibetan explorations.

  It was in 1886-1887 that Pierre G. Bonvalot, accompanied by Prince
  Henri d'Orleans, crossed the Tibetan plateau from north to south but
  failed to enter Lhasa. In 1889-1891 the American traveller, W.W.
  Rockhill, commenced his Tibetan journeys, and also attempted to reach
  Lhasa, without success. By his writings, as much as by his
  explorations, Rockhill has made his name great in the annals of
  Asiatic research. In 1891 Hamilton Bower made his famous journey from
  Leh to Peking. He, too, failed to penetrate the jealously-guarded
  portals of Lhasa; but he secured (with the assistance of a native
  surveyor) a splendid addition to our previous Tibetan mapping. In
  1891-1892-1893 the gallant French explorer, Dutreuil de Rhins, was in
  the field of Tibet, where he finally sacrificed his life to his work;
  and the same years saw George N. (afterwards Lord) Curzon in the
  Pamirs, and St George Littledale on his first great Tibetan journey,
  accompanied by his wife. Littledale's first journey ended at Peking;
  his second, in 1894-1895, took him almost within sight of the sacred
  walls of Lhasa, but he failed to pass inside. Greatest among modern
  Asiatic explorers (if we except Prjevalsky) is the brave Swede,
  Professor Sven Hedin, whose travels through the deserts of Takla Makan
  and Tibet, and whose investigations in the glacial regions of the
  Sarikol mountains, occupied him from 1894 to 1896. His is a truly
  monumental record. From 1896 to 1898 we find two British cavalry
  officers taking the front position in the list of Tibetan
  travellers-Captain M.S. Wellby of the 18th Hussars and Captain H.
  Deasy of the 16th Lancers, each striking out a new line, and rendering
  most valuable service to geography. The latter continued the Pamir
  triangulation, which had been carried across the Hindu Kush by
  Colonels Sir T.H. Holdich and R.A. Wahab during the Pamir Boundary
  Commission of 1895, into the plains of Kashgar and to the sources of
  the Zarafshan.

  Since the beginning of the century the work of Deasy in western Tibet
  has been well extended by Dr M.A. Stein and Captain C. G. Rawling, who
  have increased our knowledge of ancient fields of industry and
  commerce in Turkestan and Tibet. Ellsworth Huntington threw new light
  on the Tian-shan plateau and the Alai range by his explorations of
  1903; and Sven Hedin, between 1899 and 1902, was collecting material
  in Turkestan and Tibetan fields, and resumed his journeys in
  1905-1908, the result being to revolutionize our knowledge of the
  region north of the upper Tsanpo (see TIBET). The mission of Sir
  Francis Younghusband to Lhasa in 1904 resulted in an extension of the
  Indian system of triangulation which finally determined the
  geographical position of that city, and in a most valuable
  reconnaissance of the valleys of the Upper Brahmaputra and Indus by
  Captains C.H.D. Ryder and C.G. Rawling.

    Chinese explorations.

  Meanwhile, in the Farther East so rapid has been the progress of
  geographical research since the first beginnings of investigation into
  the route connexion between Burma and China in 1874 (when the brave
  Augustus Margary lost his life), that a gradually increasing tide of
  exploration, setting from east to west and back again, has culminated
  in a flood of inquiring experts intent on economic and commercial
  development in China, essaying to unlock those doors to trade which
  are hereafter to be propped open for the benefit of humanity. Captain
  William Gill, of the Indian survey, first made his way across China to
  eastern Tibet and Burma, and subsequently delighted the world with his
  story of the _River of Golden Sand_. Then followed another charming
  writer, E.C. Baber, who, in 1877-1878, unravelled the geographic
  mysteries of the western provinces of the Celestial empire. Mark Bell
  crossed the continent in 1887 and illustrated its ancient trade
  routes, following the steps of Archibald Colquhoun, who wandered from
  Peking to Talifu in 1881. Meanwhile, the acquisition of Burma and the
  demarcation of boundaries had opened the way to the extension of
  geographical surveys in directions hitherto untraversed. Woodthorpe
  was followed into Burmese fields by many others; and amongst the
  earliest travellers to those mysterious mountains which hide the
  sources of the Irrawaddy, the Salween and the Mekong, was Prince Henri
  d'Orleans. Burma was rapidly brought under survey; Siam was already in
  the map-making hands of James M'Carthy, whilst Curzon and Warrington
  Smyth added much to our knowledge of its picturesque coast districts.
  No more valuable contribution to the illustration of western Chinese
  configuration has been given to the public than that of C.C. Manifold
  who explored and mapped the upper basin of the Yang-tsze river between
  the years 1900 and 1904, whilst our knowledge of the geography of the
  Russo-Chinese borderland on the north-east has been largely advanced
  by the operations attending the Russo-Japanese war which terminated in
  1905.

    Indian frontiers--Afghanistan, Baluchistan, Persia.

  Turning our attention westwards, no advance in the progress of
  scientific geography is more remarkable than that recorded on the
  northern and north-western frontiers of India. Here there is little
  matter of exploration. It has rather been a wide extension of
  scientific geographical mapping. Afghan war of 1878-80; the
  Russo-Afghan Boundary Commission of 1884-1885; the occupation of
  Gilgit and Chitral; the extension of boundaries east and north of
  Afghanistan, and again, between Baluchistan and Persia--these, added
  to the opportunities afforded by the systematic survey of Baluchistan
  which has been steadily progressing since 1880--combined to produce a
  series of geographical maps which extend from the Oxus to the Indus,
  and from the Indus to the Euphrates.

  In these professional labours the Indian surveyors have been assisted
  by such scientific geographers as General Sir A. Houtum Schindler,
  Captain H.B. Vaughan and Major Percy M. Sykes in Persia, and by Sir
  George Robertson and Cockerill in Kafiristan and the Hindu Kush.

    Arabia.

  In still more western fields of research much additional light has
  been thrown since 1875 on the physiography of the great deserts and
  oases of Arabia. The labours of Charles Doughty and Wilfrid S. Blunt
  in northern Arabia in 1877-1878 were followed by those of G.
  Schweinfurth and E. Glaser in the south-west about ten years later. In
  1884-1885 Colonel S.B. Miles made his adventurous journey through
  Oman, while Theodore Bent threw searchlights backwards into ancient
  Semitic history by his investigations in the Bahrein Islands in 1888
  and in Hadramut in 1894-1895.

    Northern Asia, Siberia, &c.

  In northern Asia it is impossible to follow in detail the results of
  the organized Russian surveys. The vast steppes and forest-clad
  mountain regions of Siberia have assumed a new geographical aspect in
  the light of these revelations, and already promise a new world of
  economic resources to Russian enterprise in the near future. A
  remarkable expedition by Baron Toll in 1892 through the regions
  watered by the Lena, resulted in the collection of material which
  will greatly help to elucidate some of the problems which beset the
  geological history of the world, proving _inter alia_ the primeval
  existence of a boreal zone of the Jurassic sea round the North Pole.

    General results of investigation.

  In no other period of the world's history, of equal length of time,
  has so much scientific enterprise been directed towards the field of
  Asiatic inquiry. The first great result of recent geographical
  research has been to modify pre-existing ideas of the orography of the
  vast central region represented by Tibet and Mongolia. The great
  highland plateau which stretches from the Himalaya northwards to
  Chinese Turkestan, and from the frontier of Kashmir eastwards to
  China, has now been defined with comparative geographical exactness.
  The position of Sachu (or Saitu) in Mongolia may be taken as an
  obligatory point in modern map construction. The longitude value now
  adopted is 94° 54' E. of Greenwich, which is the revised value given
  by Prjevalsky in the map accompanying the account of his fourth
  exploration into central Asia. Other values are as follows:--

    Prjevalsky, by his second and third explorations  94° 26'
    Krishna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94° 23'
    Carey and Dalgleish . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94° 48'
    Littledale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94° 49'
    Kreitner (with Szecheny's expedition) . . . . .   94° 58'

  The longitude of Darchendo, or Tachienlu, on the extreme east, may be
  accepted as another obligatory point. The adopted value by the Royal
  Geographical Society is 102° 12". Krishna gives 102° 15", Kreitner
  102° 5", Baber 102° 18".

  South and west the bounding territories are well fixed in geographical
  position by the Indian survey determinations of the value of Himalayan
  peaks. On the north the Chinese Turkestan explorations are now brought
  into survey connexion with Kashmir and India.

  No longer do we regard the Kuen-lun mountains, which extend from the
  frontiers of Kashmir, north of Leh, almost due east to the Chinese
  province of Kansu, as the southern limit of the Gobi or Turkestan
  depression. This very remarkable longitudinal chain is undoubtedly the
  northern limit of the Chang Tang, the elevated highland steppes of
  Tibet; but from it there branches a minor system to the north-east
  from a point in about 83° E. longitude, which culminates in the Altyn
  Tagh, and extends eastwards in a continuous water-divide to the Nan
  Shan mountains, north of the Koko Nor basin. Thus between Tibet and
  the low-lying sands of Gobi we have, thrust in, a system of elevated
  valleys (Tsaidam), 8000 to 9000 ft. above sea-level, forming an
  intermediate steppe between the highest regions and the lowest, east
  of Lop Nor. All this is comparatively new geography, and it goes far
  to explain why the great trade routes from Peking to the west were
  pushed so far to the north.

    Russo-Chinese boundary.

  On the western edge of the Kashgar plains, the political boundary
  between Russia and China is defined by the meridional range of
  Sarikol. This range (known to the ancients as Taurus and in medieval
  times as Bolor) like many others of the most important great natural
  mountain divisions of the world, consists of two parallel chains, of
  which the western is the water-divide of the Pamirs, and the eastern
  (which has been known as the Kashgar or Kandar range) is split at
  intervals by lateral gorges to allow of the passage of the main
  drainage from the eastern Pamir slopes.

    Indian frontiers--Afghanistan, &c.

  In western Asia we have learned the exact value of the mountain
  barrier which lies between Merv and Herat, and have mapped its
  connexion with the Elburz of Persia. We can now fully appreciate the
  factor in practical politics which that definite but somewhat
  irregular mountain system represents which connects the water-divide
  north of Herat with the southern abutment of the Hindu Kush, near
  Bamian. Every pass of importance is known and recorded; every route of
  significance has been explored and mapped; Afghanistan has assumed a
  new political entity by the demarcation of a boundary; the value of
  Herat and of the Pamirs as bases of aggression has been assessed, and
  the whole intervening space of mountain and plain thoroughly examined.

    Persia.

  Although within the limits of western Asiatic states, still under
  Asiatic government and beyond the active influence of European
  interests, the material progress of the Eastern world has appeared to
  remain stationary, yet large accessions to geographical knowledge have
  at least been made, and in some instances a deeper knowledge of the
  surface of the country and modern conditions of life has led to the
  straightening of many crooked paths in history, and a better
  appreciation of the slow processes of advancing civilization. The
  steady advance of scientific inquiry into every corner of Persia,
  backed by the unceasing efforts of a new school of geographical
  explorers, has left nothing unexamined that can be subjected to
  superficial observation. The geographical map of the country is fairly
  complete, and with it much detailed information is now accessible
  regarding the coast and harbours of the Persian Gulf, the routes and
  passes of the interior, and the possibilities of commercial
  development by the construction of trade roads uniting the Caspian,
  the Karun, the Persian Gulf, and India, via Seistan. Persia has
  assumed a comprehensible position as a factor in future Eastern
  politics.

    Arabia.

  In Arabia progress has been slower, although the surveys carried out
  by Colonel Wahab in connexion with the boundary determined in the Aden
  hinterland added more exact geographical knowledge within a limited
  area. Little more is known of the wide spaces of interior desert than
  has already been given to the world in the works of Sir Richard F.
  Burton, Wm. Gifford Palgrave and Sir Lewis Pelly amongst Englishmen,
  and Karsten Niebuhr, John Lewis Burckhardt, Visconte, Joseph Halévy
  and others, amongst foreign travellers. Charles Doughty and Wilfrid S.
  Blunt have visited and illustrated the district of Nejd, and described
  the waning glories of the Wahabi empire. But extended geographical
  knowledge does not point to any great practical issue. Commercial
  relations with Arabia remain much as they were in 1875.

    Asia Minor, &c.

  In Asia Minor, Syria and Mesopotamia there is little to record of
  progress in material development beyond the promises held out by the
  Euphrates Valley railway concession to a German company. The exact
  information obtained by the researches of English surveyors in
  Palestine and beyond Jordan, or by the efforts of explorers in the
  regions that lie between the Mediterranean and the Caspian, have so
  far led rather to the elucidation of history than to fresh commercial
  enterprise or the possible increase of material wealth.

    Russia in Asia.

  Asiatic Russia, especially eastern Siberia and Mongolia, have been
  brought within the sphere of Russian exploration, with results so
  surprising as to form an epoch in the history of Asia. Here there has
  been a development of the resources of the Old World which parallels
  the best records of the New.

    Chinese Turkestan and Oxus basin.

  The great central depression of the continent which reaches from the
  foot of the Pamir plateau on the west through the Tarim desert to Lop
  Nor and the Gobi has yielded up many interesting secrets. The
  remarkable phenomenon of the periodic shifting of the Lop Nor system
  has been revealed by the researches of Sven Hedin, and the former
  existence of highly civilized centres of Buddhist art and industry in
  the now sand-strewn wastes of the Turkestan desert has been clearly
  demonstrated by the same great explorer and by Dr M.A. Stein. The
  depression westward of the Caspian and Aral basins, and the original
  connexion of these seas, have also come under the close investigation
  of Russian scientists, with the result that the theory of an ancient
  connexion between the Oxus and the Caspian has been displaced by the
  more recent hypothesis of an extension of the Caspian Sea eastwards
  into Trans-Caspian territory within the post-Pleiocene age. The
  discovery of shells (now living in the Caspian) at a distance of about
  100 m. inland, at an altitude of 140 to 280 ft. above the present
  level of the Caspian, gives support to this hypothesis, which is
  further advanced by the ascertained nature of the Kara-kum sands,
  which appear to be a purely marine formation exhibiting no traces of
  fluviatile deposits which might be considered as delta deposits of the
  Oxus.

  In the discussion of this problem we find the names of Baron A.
  Kaulbars, Annentkov, P.M. Lessar, and A.M. Konshin prominent. Further
  matter of interest in connexion with the Oxus basin was elucidated by
  the researches of L. Griesbach in connexion with the Russo-Afghan
  Boundary Commission. He reported the gradual formation of an
  anticlinal or ridge extending longitudinally through the great Balkh
  plain of Afghan Turkestan, which effectually shuts off the northern
  affluents of that basin from actual junction with the river. This
  evidence of a gradual process of upheaval still in action may throw
  some light on the physical (especially the climatic) changes which
  must have passed over that part of Asia since Balkh was the "mother of
  cities," the great trade centre of Asia, and the plains of Balkh were
  green with cultivation. In the restoration of the outlines of ancient
  and medieval geography in Asia Sven Hedin's discoveries of the actual
  remains of cities which have long been buried under the advancing
  waves of sand in the Takla Makan desert, cities which flourished in
  the comparatively recent period of Buddhist ascendancy in High Asia,
  is of the very highest interest, filling up a blank in the
  identification of sites mentioned by early geographers and
  illustrating more fully the course of old pilgrim routes.

    Baluchistan and Makran.

  With the completion of the surveys of Baluchistan and Makran much
  light has also been thrown on the ancient connexion between east and
  west; and the final settlement of the southern boundaries of
  Afghanistan has led to the reopening of one at least of the old trade
  routes between Seistan and India.

    Burma and China.

  Farther east no part of Asia has been brought under more careful
  investigation than the hydrography of the strange mountain wilderness
  that divides Tibet and Burma from China. In this field the researches
  of travellers already mentioned, combined with the more exact
  reconnaissance of native surveyors and of those exploring parties
  which have recently been working in the interests of commercial
  projects, have left little to future inquiry. We know now for certain
  that the great Tsanpo of Tibet and the Brahmaputra are one and the
  same river; that north of the point where the great countermarch of
  that river from east to west is effected are to be found the sources
  of the Salween, the Mekong, the Yang-tsze-kiang and the Hwang-ho, or
  Yellow river, in order, from west to east; and that south of it,
  thrust in between the extreme eastern edge of the Brahmaputra basin
  and the Salween, rise the dual sources of the Irrawaddy. From the
  water-divide which separates the most eastern affluent of the
  Brahmaputra, eastwards to the deep gorges which enclose the most
  westerly branch of the upper Yang-tsze-kiang (here running from north
  to south), is a short space of 100 m.; and within that space two
  mighty rivers, the Salween and the Mekong, send down their torrents to
  Burma and Siam. These three rivers flow parallel to each other for
  some 300 m., deep hidden in narrow and precipitous troughs, amidst
  some of the grandest scenery of Asia; spreading apart where the
  Yank-tsze takes its course eastwards, not far north of the parallel of
  25°.

  The comparatively restricted area which still remains for close
  investigation includes the most easterly sources of the Brahmaputra,
  the most northerly sources of the Irrawaddy, and some 300 m. of the
  course of the upper Salween.

  _Modern Boundary Demarcation._--The period from about 1880 has been an
  era of boundary-making in Asia, of defining the politico-geographical
  limits of empire, and of determining the responsibilities of
  government. Russia, Persia, Afghanistan, Baluchistan, India and China
  have all revised their borders, and with the revision the political
  relations between these countries have acquired a new and more assured
  basis. See also the articles on the different countries. We are not
  here concerned with understandings as to "spheres of influence," or
  with arrangements such as the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907
  concerning Persia.

    Southern boundary of Russia in Asia.

  The advance of Russia to the Turkoman deserts and the Oxus demanded a
  definite boundary between her trans-Caspian conquests and the kingdom
  of Afghanistan. This was determined on the north-west by the
  Russo-Afghan Boundary Commission of 1884-1886. A boundary was then
  fixed between the Hari Rud (the river of Herat) and the Oxus, which is
  almost entirely artificial in its construction. Zulfikar, where the
  boundary leaves the Hari Rud, is about 70 m. south of Sarakhs, and the
  most southerly point of the boundary (where it crosses the Kushk) is
  about 60 m. north of Herat. From the junction of the boundary with the
  Oxus at Khamiab about 150 m. above the crossing-point of the Russian
  Trans-Caspian railway at Charjui, the main channel of the Oxus river
  becomes the northern boundary of Afghanistan, separating that country
  from Russia, and so continues to its source in Victoria Lake of the
  Great Pamir. Beyond this point the Anglo-Russian Commission of 1895
  demarcated a line to the snowfields and glaciers which overlook the
  Chinese border. Between the Russian Pamirs and Chinese Turkestan the
  rugged line of the Sarikol range intervenes, the actual dividing line
  being still indefinite. Beyond Kashgar the southern boundary of
  Siberia follows an irregular course to the north-east, partly defined
  by the Tian-shan and Alatau mountains, till it attains a northerly
  point in about 53° N. lat. marked by the Sayan range to the west of
  Irkutsk. It then deflects south-east till it touches the Kerulen
  affluent of the Amur river at a point which is shown in unofficial
  maps as about 117° 30' E. long, and 49° 20' N. lat. From here it
  follows this affluent to its junction with the Amur river, and the
  Amur river to its junction with the Usuri. It follows the Usuri to its
  head (its direction now being a little west of south), and finally
  strikes the Pacific coast on about 42° 30' N. lat. at the mouth of the
  Tumen river 100 m. south of the Amur bay, at the head of which lies
  the Russian port of Vladivostok. At two points the Russian boundary
  nearly approaches that of provinces which are directly under British
  suzerainty. Where the Oxus river takes its great bend to the north
  from Ishkashim, the breadth of the Afghan territory intervening
  between that river and the main water-divide of the Hindu Kush is not
  more than 10 or 12 m.; and east of the Pamir extension of Afghanistan,
  where the Beyik Pass crosses the Sarikol range and drops into the
  Taghdumbash Pamir, there is but the narrow width of the Karachukar
  valley between the Sarikol and the Muztagh. Here, however, the
  boundary is again undefined. Eastwards of this the great Kashgar
  depression, which includes the Tarim desert, separates Russia from the
  vast sterile highlands of Tibet; and a continuous series of desert
  spaces of low elevation, marking the limits of a primeval inland sea
  from the Sarikol meridional watershed to the Khingan mountains on the
  western borders of Manchuria, divide her from the northern provinces
  of China. From the Khingan ranges to the Pacific, south of the Amur,
  stretch the rich districts of Manchuria, a province which connects
  Russia with the Korea by a series of valleys formed by the Sungari and
  its affluents--a land of hill and plain, forest and swamp, possessing
  a delightful climate, and vast undeveloped agricultural resources.
  Throughout this land of promise Russian influence was destroyed by
  Japan in the war of 1904. The possession of Port Arthur, and direct
  political control over Korea, place Japan in the dominant position as
  regards Manchuria.

    Afghan political boundaries.

  Coincident with the demarcation of Russian boundaries in Turkestan was
  that of northern Afghanistan. From the Hari Rud on the west to the
  Sarikol mountains on the east her northern limits were set by the
  Boundary Commissions of 1884-1886 and of 1895 respectively. Her
  southern and eastern boundaries were further defined by a series of
  minor commissions, working on the basis of the Kabul agreement of
  1893, which lasted for nearly four years, terminating with the Mohmand
  settlement at the close of an expedition in 1897.

  The Pamir extension of Afghan territory to the north-east reaches to a
  point a little short of 75° E., from whence it follows the
  water-divide to the head of the Taghdumbash Pamir, and is
  thenceforward defined by the water-parting of the Hindu Kush. It
  leaves the Hindu Kush near the Dorah Pass at the head of one of the
  minor Chitral affluents, and passing south-west divides Kafiristan
  from Chitral and Bajour, separates the sections of the Mohmands who
  are within the respective spheres of Afghan and British sovereignty,
  and crosses the Peshawar-Kabul route at Lundi-Khana. It thus places a
  broad width of independent territory between the boundaries of British
  India (which have remained practically, though not absolutely,
  untouched) and Afghanistan; and this independent belt includes Swat,
  Bajour and a part of the Mohmand territory north of the Kabul river.
  The same principle of maintaining an intervening width of neutral
  territory between the two countries is definitely established
  throughout the eastern borders of Afghanistan, along the full length
  of which a definite boundary has been demarcated to the point where it
  touches the northern limits of Baluchistan on the Gomal river. From
  the Gomal Baluchistan itself becomes an intervening state between
  British India and Afghanistan, and the dividing line between
  Baluchistan and Afghanistan is laid down with all the precision
  employed on the more northerly sections of the demarcation.

    Baluchistan.

  Baluchistan can no longer be regarded as a distinct entity amongst
  Asiatic nations, such as Afghanistan undoubtedly is. Baluchistan
  independence demands qualification. There is British Baluchistan _par
  excellence_, and there is the rest of Baluchistan which exists in
  various degrees of independence, but is everywhere subject to British
  control. British Baluchistan officially includes the districts of
  Peshin, Sibi and of Thal-Chotiali. As these districts had originally
  been Afghan, they were transferred to British authority by the treaty
  of Gandamak in 1879, although nominally they had been handed over to
  Kalat forty years previously. Now they form an official province of
  British Baluchistan within the Baluchistan Agency; and the agency
  extends from the Gomal to the Arabian Sea and the Persian frontier.
  Within this agency there are districts as independent as any in
  Afghanistan, but the political status of the province as a whole is
  almost precisely that of the native states of the Indian peninsula.
  The agent to the governor-general of India, with a staff of political
  assistants, practically exercises supreme control.

    Kirman.

  The increase of Russian influence on the northern Persian border and
  its extension southwards towards Seistan led to the appointment of a
  British consul at Kirman, the dominating town of southern Khorasan,
  directly connected with Meshed on the north; and the acquisition of
  rights of administration of the Nushki district secured to Great
  Britain the trade between Seistan and Quetta by the new Helmund desert
  route.

    Boundary between French territory and India.

  While British India has so far avoided actual geographical contact
  with one great European power in Asia on the north and west, she has
  touched another on the east. The Mekong river which limits British
  interests in Burma limits also those of France in Tongking. The
  eastern boundaries of Burma are not yet fully demarcated on the
  Chinese frontier. At a point level in latitude with Mogaung, near the
  northern termination of the Burmese railway system, this boundary is
  defined by the eastern watershed of the Nmaikha, the eastern of the
  two great northern affluents of the Irrawaddy. Then it follows an
  irregular course southwards to a position south-east of Bhamo in lat.
  24°. It next defines the northern edge of the Shan States, and finally
  strikes the Mekong river in lat. 21° 45' (approximately). From that
  point southwards the river becomes the boundary between the Shan
  States and Tongking for some 200 m., the channel of the river defining
  the limits of occupation (though not entirely of interest) between
  French and British subjects. Approximately on the parallel of 20° N.
  lat. the Burmese boundary leaves the Mekong to run westwards towards
  the Salween, and thereafter following the eastern watershed of the
  Salween basin it divides the Lower Burma provinces from Siam.

    Area and political division.

  The following table shows the areas of territories in Asia
  (continental and insular) dependent on the various extra-Asiatic
  powers, and of those which are independent or nominally so:--

     Territory.                        Sq. m.
    Russian . . . . . . . . . . . .  6,495,970
    British . . . . . . . . . . . .  1,998,220
    Dutch . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  586,980
    French  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  247,580
    U.S.A.  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  114,370
    German  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  193
    Turkish . . . . . . . . . . . . .  681,980
    Chinese . . . . . . . . . . . .  4,299,600
    Japanese  . . . . . . . . . . . .  161,110
    Other independent territories .  2,232,270

  The total area of Asia, continental and insular, is therefore somewhat
  over 16,819,000 sq. m. (but various authorities differ considerably in
  their detailed estimates). The population may be set down roughly as
  823,000,000, of which 330,000,000 inhabit Chinese territory,
  302,000,000 British, and 25,000,000 Russian.     (T. H. H.*)

  [Illustration: Geological map of Asia]

  GEOLOGY

  The geology of Asia is so complex and over wide areas so little known
  that it is difficult to give a connected account of either the
  structure or the development of the continent, and only the broader
  features can be dealt with here.

  In the south, in Syria, Arabia and the peninsula of India, none but
  the oldest rocks are folded, and the Upper Palaeozoic, the Mesozoic
  and the Tertiary beds lie almost horizontally upon them. It is a
  region of quiescence or of faulting, but not of folding. North of this
  lies a broad belt in which the Mesozoic deposits and even the lower
  divisions of the Tertiary system are thrown into folds which extend in
  a series of arcs from west to east and now form the principal mountain
  ranges of central Asia. This belt includes Asia Minor, Persia,
  Afghanistan, Baluchistan, the Himalayas, the Tian-shan, and, although
  they are very different in direction, the Burmese ranges. The
  Kuen-lun, Nan-shan and the mountain ranges of southern China are,
  perhaps, of earlier date, but nevertheless they be in the same belt.
  It is not true that throughout the whole width of this zone the beds
  are folded. There are considerable tracts which are but little
  disturbed, but these tracts are enclosed within the arcs formed by the
  folds, and the zone taken as a whole is distinctly one of crumpling.
  North of the folded belt, and including the greater part of Siberia,
  Mongolia and northern China, lies another area which is, in general,
  free from any important folding of Mesozoic or Tertiary age. There
  are, it is true, mountain ranges which are formed of folded beds; but
  in many cases the direction of the chains is different from that of
  the folds, so that the ranges must owe their elevation to other
  causes; and the folds, moreover, are of ancient date, for the most
  part Archaean or Palaeozoic. The configuration of the region is
  largely due to faulting, trough-like or tray-like depressions being
  formed, and the intervening strips, which have not been depressed,
  standing up as mountain ridges. Over a large part of Siberia and in
  the north of China, even the Cambrian beds still lie as horizontally
  as they were first laid down. In the extreme north, in the Verkhoyansk
  range and in the mountains of the Taimyr peninsula, there are
  indications of another zone of folding of Mesozoic or later date, but
  our information concerning these ranges is very scanty. Besides the
  three chief regions into which the mainland is thus seen to be
  divided, attention should be drawn to the festoons of islands which
  border the eastern side of the continent, and which are undoubtedly
  due to causes similar to those which produced the folds of the folded
  belt.

  Of all the Asiatic ranges the Himalayan is, geologically, the best
  known; and the evidence which it affords shows clearly that the folds
  to which it owes its elevation were produced by an overthrust from
  the north. It is, indeed, as if the high land of central Asia had been
  pushed southward against and over the unyielding mass formed by the
  old rocks of the Indian peninsula, and in the process the edges of the
  over-riding strata had been crumpled and folded. Overlooking all
  smaller details, we may consider Asia to consist of a northern mass
  and a southern mass, too rigid to crumple, but not too strong to
  fracture, and an intermediate belt of softer rock which was capable of
  folding. If then by the contraction of the earth's interior the outer
  crust were forced to accommodate itself to a smaller nucleus, the
  central softer belt would yield by crumpling, the more rigid masses to
  the north and south, if they gave way at all, would yield by faulting.
  It is interesting to observe, as will be shown later, that during the
  Mesozoic era there was a land mass in the north of Asia and another in
  the south, and between them lay the sea in which ordinary marine
  sediments were deposited. The belt of folding does not precisely
  coincide with this central sea, but the correspondence is fairly
  close.

  The present outline of the eastern coast and the nearly enclosed seas
  which lie between the islands and the mainland, are attributed by
  Richthofen chiefly to simple faulting.

  Little is known of the early geological history of Asia beyond the
  fact that a large part of the continent was covered by the sea during
  the Cambrian and Ordovician periods. But there is positive evidence
  that much of the north and east of Asia has been land since the
  Palaeozoic era, and it has been conclusively proved that the peninsula
  of India has never been beneath the sea since the Carboniferous period
  at least. Between these ancient land masses lies an area in which
  marine deposits of Mesozoic age are well developed and which was
  evidently beneath the sea during the greater part of the Mesozoic era.
  The northern land mass has been named Angaraland by E. Suess; the
  southern, of which the Indian peninsula is but a fragment, is called
  Gondwanaland by Neumayr, Suess and others, while the intervening sea
  is the central Mediterranean sea of Neumayr and the Tethys of Suess.
  The greater part of western Asia, including the basin of the Obi, the
  drainage area of the Aral Sea, together with Afghanistan, Baluchistan,
  Persia and Arabia, was covered by the sea during the later stages of
  the Cretaceous period, but a considerable part of this region was
  probably dry land in Jurassic times.

  The northern land mass begins in the north with the area which lies
  between the Yenisei and the Lena. Here the folded Archean rocks are
  overlaid by Cambrian and Ordovician beds, which still lie for the most
  part flat and undisturbed. Upon these rest patches of freshwater
  deposits containing numerous remains of plants. They consist chiefly
  of sandstone and conglomerate, but include workable seams of coal.
  Some of the deposits appear to be of Permian age, but others are
  probably Jurassic, and they are all included under the general name of
  the Angara series. Excepting in the extreme north, where marine
  Jurassic and Cretaceous fossils have been found, there is no evidence
  that this part of Siberia has been beneath the sea since the early
  part of the Palaeozoic era. Besides the plant beds extensive outflows
  of basic lava rest directly upon the Cambrian and Ordovician strata.
  The date of these eruptions is still uncertain, but they probably
  continued to a very recent period.

  South and east of the Palaeozoic plateau is an extensive area
  consisting chiefly of Archean rocks, and including the greater part of
  Mongolia north of the Tian-shan. Here again there are no marine beds
  of Mesozoic or Tertiary age, while plant-bearing deposits belonging to
  the Angara series are known. Structurally, the folds of this region
  are of ancient date, but the area is crossed by a series of
  depressions formed by faults, and the intervening strips, which have
  not been depressed to the same extent, now stand up as mountain
  ranges. Farther south, in the Chinese provinces of Shansi and Shensi,
  the geological succession is similar in some respects to that of the
  Siberian Palaeozoic plateau, but the sequence is more complete. There
  is again a floor of folded Archean rocks overlaid by nearly horizontal
  strata of Lower Palaeozoic age, but these are followed by marine beds
  belonging to the Carboniferous period. From the Upper Carboniferous
  onward, however, no marine deposits are known; and, as in Siberia,
  plant bearing beds are met with. Southern China is very different in
  structure, consisting largely of folded mountain chains; but the
  geological succession is very similar, and excepting near the Tibetan
  and Burmese borders, there are no marine deposits of Mesozoic or
  Tertiary age.

  Thus it appears that from the Arctic Ocean there stretches a broad
  area as far as the south of China, in which no marine deposits of
  later date than Carboniferous have yet been found, except in the
  extreme north. Freshwater and terrestrial deposits of Mesozoic age
  occur in many places, and the conclusion is irresistible that the
  greater part of this area has been land since the close of the
  Palaeozoic era. The Triassic deposits of the Verkhoyansk Range show
  that this land did not extend to the Bering Sea, while the marine
  Mesozoic deposits of Japan on the east, the western Tian-shan on the
  west and Tibet on the south give us some idea of its limits in other
  directions.

  In the same way the entire absence of any marine fossils in the
  peninsula of India, excepting near its borders, and the presence of
  the terrestrial and freshwater deposits of the Gondwana series,
  representing the whole of the geological scale from the top of the
  Carboniferous to the top of the Jurassic, show that this region also
  has been land since the Carboniferous period. It was a portion of a
  great land mass which probably extended across the Indian Ocean and
  was at one time united with the south of Africa.

  But these two land masses were not connected. Between India and China
  there is a broad belt in which marine deposits of Mesozoic and
  Tertiary age are well developed. Marine Tertiary beds occur in Burma;
  in the Himalayas and in south Tibet there is a nearly complete series
  of marine deposits from the Carboniferous to the Eocene; in
  Afghanistan the Mesozoic beds are in part marine and in part
  fluviatile. The sea in which these strata were deposited seems to have
  attained its greatest extension in Upper Cretaceous times when its
  waters spread over the whole of western Asia and even encroached
  slightly upon the Indian land. The Eocene sea however cannot have been
  much inferior in extent.

  It was after the Eocene period that the main part of the elevation of
  the Himalayas took place, as is shown by the occurrence of nummulitic
  limestone at a height of 20,000 ft. The formation of this and of the
  other great mountain chains of central Asia resulted in the isolation
  of portions of the former central sea, and the same forces finally led
  to the elevation of the whole region and the union of the old
  continents of Angara and Gondwana. Gondwanaland, however, did not long
  survive, and the portion which lay between India and South Africa sank
  beneath the waves in Tertiary times.

  Leaving out of consideration all evidence of more ancient volcanic
  activity, each of the three regions into which, as we have seen, the
  continent may be divided has been, during or since the Cretaceous
  period, the seat of great volcanic eruptions. In the southern region
  of unfolded beds are found the lavas of the "harras" of Arabia, and in
  India the extensive flows of the Deccan Trap. In the central folded
  belt lie the great volcanoes, now mostly extinct, of Asia Minor,
  Armenia, Persia and Baluchistan. In Burma also there is at least one
  extinct volcano. In the northern unfolded region great flows of basic
  lava lie directly upon the Cambrian and Ordovician beds of Siberia,
  but are certainly in part of Tertiary age. Similar flows on a smaller
  scale occur in Manchuria, Korea and northern China.

  In all these cases, however, the eruptions have now almost ceased, and
  the great volcanoes of the present day lie in the islands off the
  eastern and south eastern coasts.

  REFERENCES--E. Suess, _Das Antlitz der Erde_ (see, especially, vol.
  iii. part 1.); F.V. Richthofen, "Ueber Gestalt und Gliederung einer
  Grundlinie in der Morphologie Ost-Asiens," _Sitz. k. preuss. Akad.
  Wiss._ (Berlin, 1900), pp. 888-925, and Geomorphologische Studien aus
  Ostasien, _ibid._, 1901, pp. 782-808, 1902, pp. 944-975, 1903, pp.
  867-918.     (P. La.)

  CLIMATE.

    Temperature.

  Among the places on the globe where the temperature falls lowest are
  some in northern Asia; and among those where it rises highest are some
  in southern Asia. The mean temperature of the north coast of eastern
  Siberia is but a few degrees above the zero of Fahrenheit; the lowest
  mean temperature anywhere observed is about 4° Fahr., at Melville
  Island, north of the American continent. The isothermals of mean
  annual temperature lie over northern Asia on curves tolerably regular
  in their outline, having their western branches in a somewhat higher
  latitude than their eastern; a reduction of 1° of latitude corresponds
  approximately--and irrespective of modifications due to elevation--to
  a rise of ½° Fahr., as far say as 30° N, where the mean temperature is
  about 75° Fahr. Farther south the increase is slower, and the highest
  mean temperature anywhere attained in southern Asia is not much above
  82° Fahr.

  The variations of temperature are very great in Siberia, amounting
  near the coast to more than 100° Fahr., between the mean of the
  hottest and coldest months, and to still more between the extreme
  temperatures of those months. In southern Asia, and particularly near
  the sea, the variation between the hottest and coldest monthly means
  is very much less, and under the equator it is reduced to about 5°. In
  Siberia the difference between the means of the hottest and coldest
  months is hardly anywhere less than 60° Fahr. On the Sea of Aral it is
  80° Fahr., and at Astrakhan, on the Caspian, more than 50°. At Tiflis
  it is 45°. In northern China, at Peking, it is 55°, reduced to 30° at
  Canton, and to 20° at Manila. In northern India the greatest
  difference does not exceed 40°, and it falls off to about 15° at
  Calcutta and to about 10° or 12° at Bombay and Madras. The
  temperatures at the head of the Persian Gulf approximate to those of
  northern India, and those of Aden to Madras. At Singapore the range is
  less than 5°, and at Batavia in Java, and Galle in Ceylon, it is about
  the same. The extreme temperatures in Siberia may be considered to lie
  between 80° and 90° Fahr. for maxima, and between -40° and -70° Fahr.
  for minima. The extreme of heat near the Caspian and Aral Seas rises
  to nearly 100° Fahr., while that of cold falls to -20° Fahr. or lower.
  Compared with these figures, we find in southern Asia 110° or 112°
  Fahr. as a maximum hardly ever exceeded. The absolute minimum in
  northern India, in lat. 30°, hardly goes below 32°; at Calcutta it is
  about 40°, though the thermometer seldom falls to 50°. At Madras it
  rarely falls as low as 65°, or at Bombay below 60°. At Singapore and
  Batavia the thermometer very rarely falls below 70°, or rises above
  90°. At Aden the minimum is a few degrees below 70°, the maximum not
  much exceeding 90°.

  These figures sufficiently indicate the main characteristics of the
  air temperatures of Asia. Throughout its northern portion the winter
  is long and of extreme severity; and even down to the circle of 35° N.
  lat., the minimum temperature is almost as low as zero of Fahrenheit.
  The summers are hot, though short in the northern latitudes, the
  maximum of summer heat being comparatively little less than that
  observed in the tropical countries farther south. The moderating
  effect of the proximity of the ocean is felt in an important degree
  along the southern and eastern parts of Asia, where the land is broken
  up into islands or peninsulas. The great elevations above the
  sea-level of the central part of Asia, and of the table-lands of
  Afghanistan and Persia, tend to exaggerate the winter cold; while the
  sterility of the surface, due to the small rainfall over the same
  region, operates powerfully in the opposite direction in increasing
  the summer heat. In the summer a great accumulation of solar heat
  takes place on the dry surface soil, from which it cannot be released
  upwards by evaporation, as might be the case were the soil moist or
  covered with vegetation, nor can it be readily conveyed away downwards
  as happens on the ocean. In the winter similar consequences ensue, in
  a negative direction, from the prolonged loss of heat by radiation in
  the long and clear nights--an effect which is intensified wherever the
  surface is covered with snow, or the air little charged with vapour.
  In illustration of the very slow diffusion of heat in the solid crust
  of the earth, and as affording a further indication of the climate of
  northern Asia, reference may here be made to the frozen soil of
  Siberia, in the vicinity of Yakutsk. In this region the earth is
  frozen permanently to a depth of more than 380 ft. at which the
  temperature is still 5° or 6° Fahr. below the freezing point of water,
  the summer heat merely thawing the surface to a depth of about 3 ft.
  At a depth of 50 ft. the temperature is about 15 Fahr. below the
  freezing point. Under such conditions of the soil, the land,
  nevertheless, produces crops of wheat and other grain from fifteen to
  forty fold.

  The very high summer temperatures of the area north of the tropic of
  Cancer are sufficiently accounted for, when compared with those
  observed south of the tropic, by the increased length of the day in
  the higher latitude, which more than compensates for the loss of heat
  due to the smaller mid-day altitude of the sun. The difference between
  the heating power of the sun's rays at noon on the 21st of June, in
  latitude 20° and in latitude 45°, is only about 2%; while the
  accumulated heat received during the day, which is lengthened to 15½
  hours in the higher latitude, is greater by about 11% than in the
  lower latitude, where the day consists only of 13¼ hours.

  Although the foregoing account of the temperatures of Asia supplies
  the main outline of the observed phenomena, a very important modifying
  cause, of which more will be said hereafter, comes into operation over
  the whole of the tropical region, namely, the periodical summer rains.
  These tend very greatly to arrest the increase of the summer heat over
  the area where they prevail, and otherwise give it altogether peculiar
  characteristics.

    Pressure and Winds.

  The great summer heat, by expanding the air upwards, disturbs the
  level of the planes of equal pressure, and causes an outflow of the
  upper strata from the heated area. The winter cold produces an effect
  of just an opposite nature, and causes an accumulation of air over the
  cold area. The diminution of barometric pressure which takes place all
  over Asia during the summer months, and the increase in the winter,
  are hence, no doubt, the results of the alternate heating and cooling
  of the air over the continent.

  The necessary and immediate results of such periodical changes of
  pressure are winds, which, speaking generally, blow from the area of
  greatest to that of least pressure--subject, however, to certain
  modifications of direction, arising from the absolute motion of the
  whole body of the air due to the revolution of the earth on its axis
  from west to east. The south-westerly winds which prevail north of the
  equator during the hot half of the year, to which navigators have
  given the name of the south-west monsoon (the latter word being a
  corruption of the Indian name for season), arise from the great
  diminution of atmospheric pressure over Asia, which begins to be
  strongly marked with the great rise of temperature in April and May,
  and the simultaneous relatively higher pressure over the equator and
  the regions south of it. This diminution of pressure, which continues
  as the heat increases till it reaches its maximum in July soon after
  the solstice, is followed by the corresponding development of the
  south-west monsoon; and as the barometric pressure is gradually
  restored, and becomes equalized within the tropics soon after the
  equinox in October, with the general fall of temperature north of the
  equator, the south-west winds fall off, and are succeeded by a
  north-east monsoon, which is developed during the winter months by the
  relatively greater atmospheric pressure which then occurs over Asia,
  as compared with the equatorial region.

  Although the succession of the periodical winds follows the progress
  of the seasons as just described, the changes in the wind's direction
  everywhere take place under the operation of special local influences
  which often disguise the more general law, and make it difficult to
  trace. Thus the south-west monsoon begins in the Arabian Sea with west
  and north-westerly winds, which draw round as the year advances to
  south-west and fall back again in the autumn by north-west to north.
  In the Bay of Bengal the strength of the south-west monsoon is rather
  from the south and south-east, being succeeded by north-east winds
  after October, which give place to northerly and north-westerly winds
  as the year advances. Among the islands of the Malay Archipelago the
  force of the monsoons is much interrupted, and the position of this
  region on the equator otherwise modifies the directions of the
  prevailing winds. The southerly summer winds of the Asiatic seas
  between the equator and the tropic do not extend to the coasts of
  Java, and the south-easterly trade winds are there developed in the
  usual manner. The China Sea is fully exposed to both monsoons, the
  normal directions of which nearly coincide with the centre of the
  channel between the continent of Asia and the eastern islands.

  The south-west monsoon does not generally extend, in its character of
  a south-west wind, over the land. The current of air flowing in from
  over the sea is gradually diverted towards the area of least pressure,
  and at the same time is dissipated and loses much of its original
  force. The winds which pass northward over India blow as
  south-easterly and easterly winds over the north-eastern part of the
  Gangetic plain, and as south winds up the Indus. They seem almost
  entirely to have exhausted their northward velocity by the time they
  have reached the northern extremity of the great Indian plain; they
  are not felt on the table-lands of Afghanistan, and hardly penetrate
  into the Indus basin or the ranges of the Himalaya, by which
  mountains, and those which branch off from them into the Malay
  peninsula, they are prevented from continuing their progress in the
  direction originally imparted to them.

  Among the more remarkable phenomena of the hotter seas of Asia must be
  noticed the revolving storms or cyclones, which are of frequent
  occurrence in the hot months in the Indian Ocean and China Sea, in
  which last they are known under the name of typhoon. The cyclones of
  the Bay of Bengal appear to originate over the Andaman and Nicobar
  islands, and are commonly propagated in a north-westward direction,
  striking the east coast of the Indian peninsula at various points, and
  then often advancing with an easterly tendency over the land, and
  passing with extreme violence across the delta of the Ganges. They
  occur in all the hot months, from June to October, and more rarely in
  November, and appear to be originated by adverse currents from the
  north meeting those of the south-west monsoon. The cyclones of the
  China Sea also occur in the hot months of the year, but they advance
  from north-east to south-west, though occasionally from east to west;
  they originate near the island of Formosa, and extend to about the
  10th degree of N. lat. They are thus developed in nearly the same
  latitudes and in the same months as those of the Indian Sea, though
  their progress is in a different direction. In both cases, however,
  the storms appear to advance towards the area of greatest heat. In
  these storms the wind invariably circulates from north by west through
  south to east.

    Rainfall.

  The heated body of air carried from the Indian Ocean over southern
  Asia by the south-west monsoon comes up highly charged with watery
  vapour, and hence in a condition to release a large body of water as
  rain upon the land, whenever it is brought into circumstances which
  reduce its temperature in a notable degree. Such a reduction of
  temperature is brought about along the greater part of the coasts of
  India and of the Burmo-Siamese peninsula by the interruption of the
  wind current by continuous ranges of mountains, which force the mass
  of air to rise over them, whereby the air being rarefied, its specific
  capacity for heat is increased and its temperature falls, with a
  corresponding condensation of the vapour originally held in
  suspension.

  This explanation of the principal efficient cause of the summer rains
  of south Asia is immediately based on an analysis of the complicated
  phenomena actually observed, and it serves to account for many
  apparent anomalies. The heaviest falls of rain occur along lines of
  mountain of some extent directly facing the vapour-bearing winds, as
  on the Western Ghats of India and the west coast of the Malay
  peninsula. The same results are found along the mountains at a
  distance from the sea, the heaviest rainfall known to occur anywhere
  in the world (not less than 600 in. in the year) being recorded on the
  Khasi range about 100 m. north-east of Calcutta, which presents an
  abrupt front to the progress of the moist winds flowing up from the
  Bay of Bengal. The cessation of the rains on the southern border of
  Baluchistan, west of Karachi, obviously arises from the projection of
  the south-east coast of Arabia, which limits the breadth of the
  south-west monsoon air current and the length of the coast-line
  directly exposed to it. The very small and irregular rainfall in Sind
  and along the Indus is to be accounted for by the want of any obstacle
  in the path of the vapour-bearing winds, which, therefore, carry the
  uncondensed rain up to the Punjab, where it falls on the outer ranges
  of the western Himalaya and of Afghanistan.

  The diurnal mountain winds are very strongly marked on the Himalaya,
  where they probably are the most active agents in determining the
  precipitation of rain along the chain--the monsoon currents, as before
  stated, not penetrating among the mountains. The formation of dense
  banks of cloud in the afternoon, when the up wind is strongest, along
  the southern face of the snowy ranges of the Himalaya, is a regular
  daily phenomenon during the hotter months of the year, and heavy rain,
  accompanied by electrical discharges, is the frequent result of such
  condensation.

  Too little is known of the greater part of Asia to admit of any more
  being said with reference to this part of the subject, than to
  mention a few facts bearing on the rainfall. In northern Asia there
  is a generally equal rainfall of 19 to 29 in. between the Volga and
  the Lena in Manchuria and northern China, rather more considerable
  increase in Korea, Siam and Japan. At Tiflis the yearly fall is 22
  in.; on the Caspian about 7 or 8 in.; on the Sea of Aral 5 or 6 in. In
  south-western Siberia it is 12 or 14 in., diminishing as we proceed
  eastward to 6 or 7 in. at Barnaul, and to 5 or 6 in. at Urga in
  northern Mongolia. In eastern Siberia it is about 15 to 20 in. In
  China we find about 23 in. to be the fall at Peking; while at Canton,
  which lies nearly on the northern tropic and the region of the
  south-west monsoon is entered, the quantity is increased to 78 in. At
  Batavia in Java the fall is about 78 in.; at Singapore it is nearly
  100 in. The quantity increases considerably on that part of the coast
  of the Malay peninsula which is not sheltered from the south-west by
  Sumatra. On the Tenasserim and Burmese coast falls of more than 200
  in. are registered, and the quantity is here nowhere less than 75 or
  80 in., which is about the average of the eastern part of the delta of
  the Ganges, Calcutta standing at about 64 in. On the hills that flank
  Bengal on the east the fall is very great. On the Khasi hills, at an
  elevation of about 4500 ft., the average of ten years is more than 550
  in. As much as 150 in. has been measured in one month, and 610 in. in
  one year. On the west coast of the Indian peninsula the fall at the
  sea-level varies from about 75 to 100 in., and at certain elevations
  on the mountains more than 250 in. is commonly registered, with
  intermediate quantities at intervening localities. On the east coast
  the fall is far less, nowhere rising to 50 in., and towards the
  southern apex of the peninsula being reduced to 25 or 30 in. Ceylon
  shows from 60 to 80 in. As we recede from the coast the fall
  diminishes, till it is reduced to about 25 or 30 in. at the head of
  the Gangetic plain. The tract along the Indus to within 60 or 80 m. of
  the Himalaya is almost rainless, 6 or 8 in. being the fall in the
  southern portion of the Punjab. On the outer ranges of the Himalaya
  the yearly fall amounts to about 200 in. on the east in Sikkim, and
  gradually diminishes on the west, where north of the Punjab it is
  about 70 or 80 in. In the interior of the chain the rain is far less,
  and the quantity of precipitation is so small in Tibet that it can be
  hardly measured. It is to the greatly reduced fall of snow on the
  northern faces of the highest ranges of the Himalaya that is to be
  attributed the higher level of the snow-line, a phenomenon which was
  long a cause of discussion.

  In Afghanistan, Persia, Asia Minor and Syria, winter and spring appear
  to be the chief seasons of condensation. In other parts of Asia the
  principal part of the rain falls between May and September, that is,
  in the hottest half of the year. In the islands under the equator the
  heaviest fall is between October and February.     (R. S.)

  FLORA AND FAUNA

  The general assemblage of animals and plants found over northern Asia
  resembles greatly that found in the parts of Europe which are adjacent
  and have a similar climate. Siberia, north of the 50th parallel, has a
  climate not much differing from a similarly situated portion of
  Europe, though the winters are more severe and the summers hotter. The
  rainfall, though moderate, is still sufficient to maintain the supply
  of water in the great rivers that traverse the country to the Arctic
  Sea, and to support an abundant vegetation. A similar affinity exists
  between the life of the southern parts of Europe and that in the zone
  of Asia extending from the Mediterranean across to the Himalaya and
  northern China. This belt, which embraces Asia Minor, northern Persia,
  Afghanistan, and the southern slopes of the Himalaya, from its
  elevation has a temperate climate, and throughout it the rainfall is
  sufficient to maintain a vigorous vegetation, while the summers,
  though hot. and the winters, though severe, are not extreme. The
  plants and animals along it are found to have a marked similarity of
  character to those of south Europe, with which region the zone is
  virtually continuous.

  The extremely dry and hot tracts which constitute an almost unbroken
  desert from Arabia, through south Persia and Baluchistan, to Sind, are
  characterized by considerable uniformity in the types of life, which
  closely approach to those of the neighbouring hot and dry regions of
  Africa. The region of the heavy periodical summer rains and high
  temperature, which comprises India, the Indo-Chinese peninsula, and
  southern China, as well as the western part of the Malay Archipelago,
  is also marked by much similarity in the plants and animals throughout
  its extent. The area between the southern border of Siberia and the
  margin of the temperate alpine zone of the Himalaya and north China,
  comprising what are commonly called central Asia, Turkestan, Mongolia
  and western Manchuria, is an almost rainless region, having winters of
  extreme severity and summers of intense heat. Its animals and plants
  have a special character suited to the peculiar climatal conditions,
  more closely allied to those of the adjacent northern Siberian tract
  than of the other bordering regions. The south-eastern parts of the
  Malay Archipelago have much in common with the Australian continent,
  to which they adjoin, though their affinities are chiefly Indian.
  North China and Japan also have many forms of life in common. Much
  still remains to be done in the exploration of China and eastern Asia;
  but it is known that many of the special forms of this region extend
  to the Himalaya, while others clearly indicate a connexion with North
  America.

  The foregoing brief review of the principal territorial divisions
  according to which the forms of life are distributed in Asia,
  indicates how close is the dependence of this distribution on climatic
  conditions, and this will be made more apparent by a somewhat fuller
  account of the main features of the flora and fauna.

    Northern Asia.

  _Flora._--The flora of the whole of northern Asia is in essentials the
  same as that of northern Europe, the differences being due rather to
  variations of species than of genera. The absence of the oak and of
  all heaths east of the Ural may be noticed. Pines, larch, birch are
  the principal trees on the mountains; willow, alders and poplars on
  the lower ground. The northern limit of the pine in Siberia is about
  70° N.

  Along the warm temperate zone, from the Mediterranean to the Himalaya,
  extends a flora essentially European in character. Many European
  species reach the central Himalaya, though few are known in its
  eastern parts. The genera common to the Himalaya and Europe are much
  more abundant, and extend throughout the chain, and to all elevations.
  There is also a corresponding diffusion of Japanese and Chinese forms
  along this zone, these being most numerous in the eastern Himalaya,
  and less frequent in the west.

  The truly tropical flora of the hotter and wetter regions of eastern
  India is continuous with that of the Malayan peninsula and islands,
  and extends along the lower ranges of the Himalaya, gradually becoming
  less marked and rising to lower elevations as we go westward, where
  the rainfall diminishes and the winter cold increases.

  The vegetation of the higher and therefore cooler and less rainy
  ranges of the Himalaya has greater uniformity of character along the
  whole chain, and a closer general approach to European forms is
  maintained; an increased number of species is actually identical,
  among these being found, at the greatest elevations, many alpine
  plants believed to be identical with species of the north Arctic
  regions. On reaching the Tibetan plateau, with the increased dryness
  the flora assumes many features of the Siberian type. Many true
  Siberian species are found, and more Siberian genera. Some of the
  Siberian forms, thus brought into proximity with the Indian flora,
  extend to the rainy parts of the mountains, and even to the plains of
  upper India. Assemblages of marine plants form another remarkable
  feature of Tibet, these being frequently met with growing at
  elevations of 14,000 to 15,000 ft. above the sea, more especially in
  the vicinity of the many salt lakes of those regions.

  The vegetation of the hot and dry region of the south-west of the
  continent consists largely of plants which are diffused over Africa,
  Baluchistan and Sind; many of these extend into the hotter parts of
  India, and not a few common Egyptian plants are to be met with in the
  Indian peninsula.

    Indian region.

  The whole number of species of plants indigenous in the region of
  south-eastern Asia, which includes India and the Malayan peninsula and
  islands, from about the 65th to the 105th meridian, was estimated by
  Sir J.D. Hooker at 12,000 to 15,000. The principal orders, arranged
  according to their numerical importance, are as follows:--Leguminosae,
  Rubiaceae, Orchidaceae, Compositae, Gramineae, Euphorbiaceae,
  Acanthaceae, Cyperaceae and Labiatae. But within this region there is
  a very great variation between the vegetation of the more humid and
  the more arid regions, while the characteristics of the flora on the
  higher mountain ranges differ wholly from those of the plains. In
  short, we have a somewhat heterogeneous assemblage of tropical,
  temperate and alpine plants, as has been already briefly indicated, of
  which, however, the tropical are so far dominant as to give their
  character to the flora viewed as a whole. The Indian flora contains a
  more general and complete illustration of almost all the chief natural
  families of all parts of the world than any other country. Compositae
  are comparatively rare; so also Gramineae and Cyperaceae are in some
  places deficient, and Labiatae, Leguminosae and ferns in others.
  Euphorbiaceae and Scrophulariaceae and Orchidaceae are universally
  present, the last in specially large proportions.

  The perennially humid regions of the Malayan peninsula and western
  portion of the archipelago are everywhere covered with dense forest,
  rendered difficult to traverse by the thorny cane, a palm of the genus
  _Calamus_, which has its greatest development in this part of Asia.
  The chief trees belong to the orders of Terebinthaceae, Sapindaceae,
  Meliaceae, Clusiaceae, Dipterocarpaceae, Ternstroemiaceae,
  Leguminosae, laurels, oaks and figs, with Dilleniaceae, Sapotaceae and
  nutmegs. Bamboos and palms, with _Pandanus_ and _Dracaena_, are also
  abundant. A similar forest flora extends along the mountains of
  eastern India to the Himalaya, where it ascends to elevations varying
  from 6000 to 7000 ft. on the east to 3000 or 4000 ft. on the west.

  The arboreous forms which least require the humid and equable heat of
  the more truly tropical and equatorial climates, and are best able to
  resist the high temperatures and excessive drought of the northern
  Indian hot months from April to June, are certain Leguminosae,.
  _Bauhinia, Acacia, Butea_ and _Dalbergia, Bombax, Skorea, Nauclea,
  Lagerstroemia_, and _Bignonia_, a few bamboos and palms, with others
  which extend far beyond the tropic, and give a tropical aspect to the
  forest to the extreme northern border of the Indian plain.

  Of the herbaceous vegetation of the more rainy regions may be noted
  the Orchidaceae, Orontiaceae, Scitamineae, with ferns and other
  Cryptogams, besides Gramineae and Cyperaceae. Among these some forms,
  as among the trees, extend much beyond the tropic and ascend into the
  temperate zones on the mountains, of which may be mentioned _Begonia,
  Osbeckia_, various Cyrtandraceae, Scitamineae, and a few epiphytical
  orchids.

  Of the orders most largely developed in south India, and more
  sparingly elsewhere, may be named Aurantiaceae, Dipterocarpaceae,
  Balsaminaceae, Ebenaceae, Jasmineae, and Cyrtandraceae; but of these
  few contain as many as 100 peculiar Indian species. _Nepenthes_ may be
  mentioned as a genus specially developed in the Malayan area, and
  extending from New Caledonia to Madagascar; it is found as far north
  as the Khasi hills, and in Ceylon, but does not appear on the Himalaya
  or in the peninsula of India. The Balsaminaceae may be named as being
  rare in the eastern region and very abundant in the peninsula. A
  distinct connexion between the flora of the peninsula and Ceylon and
  that of eastern tropical Africa is observable not only in the great
  similarity of many of the more truly tropical forms, and the identity
  of families and genera found in both regions, but in a more remarkable
  manner in the likeness of the mountain flora of this part of Africa to
  that of the peninsula, in which several species occur believed to be
  identical with Abyssinian forms. This connexion is further established
  by the absence from both areas of oaks, conifers and cycads, which, as
  regards the first two families, is a remarkable feature of the flora
  of the peninsula and Ceylon, as the mountains rise to elevations in
  which both of them are abundant to the north and east. With these
  facts it has to be noticed that many of the principal forms of the
  eastern flora are absent or comparatively rare in the peninsula and
  Ceylon.

  The general physiognomy of the Indian flora is mainly determined by
  the conditions of humidity of climate. The impenetrable shady forests
  of the Malay peninsula and eastern Bengal, of the west coast of the
  Indian peninsula, and of Ceylon, offer a strong contrast to the more
  loosely-timbered districts of the drier regions of central India and
  the north-western Himalaya. The forest areas of India include the
  dense vegetation and luxuriant growth of the Tarai jungles at the foot
  of the eastern Himalaya, and wide stretches of loosely-timbered
  country which are a prevailing feature in the Central Provinces and
  parts of Madras. Where the lowlands are highly cultivated they are
  adorned with planted wood, and where they are cut off from rain they
  are nearly completely desert.

  The higher mountains rise abruptly from the plains; on their slopes,
  clothed below almost exclusively with the more tropical forms, a
  vegetation of a warm temperate character, chiefly evergreen, soon
  begins to prevail, comprising Magnoliaceae, Ternstroemiaccae,
  subtropical Rosaceae, rhododendron, oak, _Ilex, Symplocos_, Lauraceae,
  _Pinus longifolia_, with mountain forms of truly tropical orders,
  palms, _Pandanus, Musa, Vitis, Vernonia_, and many others. On the east
  the vegetation of the Himalaya is most abundant and varied. The forest
  extends, with great luxuriance, to an elevation of 12,000 ft., above
  which the sub-alpine region may be said to begin, in which
  rhododendron scrub often covers the ground up to 13,000 or 14,000 ft.
  Only one pine is found below 8000 ft., above which several other
  Coniferae occur. Plantains, tree-ferns, bamboos, several _Calami_, and
  other palms, and _Pandanus_, are abundant at the lower levels. Between
  4000 and 8000 ft. epiphytal orchids are very frequent, and reach even
  to 10,000 ft. Vegetation ascends on the drier and less snowy mountain
  slopes of Tibet to above 18,000 ft. On the west, with the drier
  climate, the forest is less luxuriant and dense, and the hill-sides
  and the valleys better cultivated. The warm mountain slopes are
  covered with _Pinus longifolia_, or with oaks and rhododendron, and
  the forest is not commonly dense below 8000 ft., excepting in some of
  the more secluded valleys at a low elevation. From 8000 to 12,000 ft.,
  a thick forest of deciduous trees is almost universal, above which a
  sub-alpine region is reached, and vegetation as on the east continues
  up to 18,000 ft. or more. The more tropical forms of the east, such as
  the tree-ferns, do not reach west of Nepal. The cedar or deodar is
  hardly indigenous east of the sources of the Ganges, and at about the
  same point the forms of the west begin to be more abundant, increasing
  in number as we advance towards Afghanistan.

  The cultivated plants of the Indian region include wheat, barley, rice
  and maize; various millets, _Sorghum, Penicillaria, Panicum_ and
  _Eleusine_; many pulses, peas and beans; mustard and rape; ginger and
  turmeric; pepper and capsicum; several Cucurbitaceae; tobacco,
  _Sesamum_, poppy, _Crotolaria_ and _Cannabis_; cotton, indigo and
  sugar; coffee and tea; oranges, lemons of many sorts; pomegranate,
  mango, figs, peaches, vines and plantains. The more common palms are
  _Cocos, Phoenix_ and _Borassus_, supplying cocoa-nut and toddy. Indian
  agriculture combines the harvests of the tropical and temperate zones.
  North of the tropic the winter cold is sufficient to admit of the
  cultivation of almost all the cereals and vegetables of Europe, wheat
  being sown in November and reaped early in April. In this same region
  the summer heat and rain provide a thoroughly tropical climate, in
  which rice and other tropical cereals are freely raised, being as a
  rule sown early in July and reaped in September or October. In
  southern India, and the other parts of Asia and of the islands having
  a similar climate, the difference of the winter and summer half-years
  is not sufficient to admit of the proper cultivation of wheat or
  barley. The other cereals may be seen occasionally, where artificial
  irrigation is practised, in all stages of progress at all seasons of
  the year, though the operations of agriculture are, as a general rule,
  limited to the rainy months, when alone is the requisite supply of
  water commonly forthcoming.

  The trees of India producing economically useful timber are
  comparatively few, owing to the want of durability of the wood, in the
  extremely hot and moist climate. The teak, _Tectona grandis_, supplies
  the finest timber. It is found in greatest perfection in the forests
  of the west coasts of Burma and the Indian peninsula, where the
  rainfall is heaviest, growing to a height of 100 or 150 ft., mixed
  with other trees and bamboos. The sal, _Shorea robusta_, a very
  durable wood, is most abundant along the skirts of the Himalaya from
  Assam to the Punjab, and is found in central India, to which the teak
  also extends. The sal grows to a large size, and is more gregarious
  than the teak. Of other useful woods found in the plains may be named
  the babool, _Acacia_; toon, _Cedrela_; and sissoo, _Dalbergia_. The
  only timber in ordinary use obtained from the Himalaya proper is the
  deodar, _Cedrus deodara_. Besides these are the sandalwood,
  _Santalum_, of southern India, and many sorts of bamboo found in all
  parts of the country. The cinchona has recently been introduced with
  complete success; and the mahogany of America reaches a large size,
  and gives promise of being grown for use as timber.

    Western Asia.

  The flora of the rainless region of south-western Asia is continuous
  with the desert flora of northern and eastern Africa, and extends from
  the coast of Senegal to the meridian of 75° E., or from the great
  African desert to the border of the rainless tract along the Indus and
  the southern parts of the Punjab. It includes the peninsula of Arabia,
  the shores of the Persian Gulf, south Persia, and Afghanistan and
  Baluchistan. On the west its limit is in the Cape Verde Islands, and
  it is partially represented in Abyssinia.

  The more common plants in the most characteristic part of this region
  in southern Arabia are Capparidaceae, Euphorbiaceae, and a few
  Leguminosae, a _Reseda_ and _Dipterygium_; palms, Polygonaceae, ferns,
  and other cryptogams, are rare. The number of families relative to the
  area is very small, and the number of genera and species equally
  restricted, in very many cases a single species being the only
  representative of an order. The aspect of the vegetation is very
  peculiar, and is commonly determined by the predominance of some four
  or five species, the rest being either local or sparingly scattered
  over the area. The absence of the ordinary bright green colours of
  vegetation is another peculiarity of this flora, almost all the plants
  having glaucous or whitened stems. Foliage is reduced to a minimum,
  the moisture of the plant being stored up in massive or fleshy stems
  against the long-continued drought. Aridity has favoured the
  production of spines as a defence from external attack, sharp thorns
  are frequent, and asperities of various sorts predominate. Many
  species produce gums and resins, their stems being encrusted with the
  exudations, and pungency and aromatic odour is an almost universal
  quality of the plants of desert regions.

  The cultivated plants of Arabia are much the same as those of northern
  India--wheat, barley, and the common _Sorghum_, with dates and lemons,
  cotton and indigo. To these must be added coffee, which is restricted
  to the slopes of the western hills. Among the more mountainous regions
  of the south-western part of Arabia, known as Arabia Felix, the
  summits of which rise to 6000 or 7000 ft., the rainfall is sufficient
  to develop a more luxuriant vegetation, and the valleys have a flora
  like that of similarly situated parts of southern Persia, and the less
  elevated parts of Afghanistan and Baluchistan, partaking of the
  characters of that of the hotter Mediterranean region. In these
  countries aromatic shrubs are abundant. Trees are rare, and almost
  restricted to _Pistacia, Celtis_ and _Dodonaea_, with poplars, and the
  date palm. Prickly forms of _Statice_ and _Astragalus_ cover the dry
  hills. In the spring there is an abundant herbaceous vegetation,
  including many bulbous plants, with genera, if not species, identical
  with those of the Syrian region, some of which extend to the Himalaya.

  The flora of the northern part of Afghanistan approximates to that of
  the contiguous western Himalaya. _Quercus Ilex_, the evergreen oak of
  southern Europe, is found in forests as far east as the Sutlej,
  accompanied with other European forms. In the higher parts of
  Afghanistan and Persia Boraginaceae and thistles abound; gigantic
  Umbelliferae, such as _Ferula, Galbanum, Dorema, Bubon, Peucedanum,
  Prangos_, and others, also characterize the same districts, and some
  of them extend into Tibet.

  The flora of Asia Minor and northern Persia differs but little from
  that of the southern parts of Europe. The mountains are clothed, where
  the fall of rain is abundant, with forests of _Quercus, Fagus, Ulmus,
  Acer, Carpinus_ and _Corylus_, and various Coniferae. Of these the
  only genus that is not found on the Himalaya is _Fagus_. Fruit trees
  of the plum tribe abound. The cultivated plants are those of southern
  Europe.

    Eastern Asia.

  The vegetation of the Malayan Islands is for the most part that of the
  wetter and hotter region of India; but the greater uniformity of the
  temperature and humidity leads to the predominance of certain tropical
  forms not so conspicuous in India, while the proximity of the
  Australian continent has permitted the partial diffusion of Australian
  types which are not seen in India. The liquidambar and nutmeg may be
  noticed among the former, the first is one of the most conspicuous
  trees in java, on the mountains of the eastern part of which the
  casuarina, one of the characteristic forms of Australia, is also
  abundant. Rhododendrons occur in Borneo and Sumatra, descending to the
  level of the sea. On the mountains of Java there appears to be no
  truly alpine flora, _Saxifraga_ is not found. In Borneo some of the
  temperate forms of Australia appear on the higher mountains. On the
  other islands similar characteristics are to be observed, Australian
  genera extending to the Philippines, and even to southern China.

  The analysis of the Hong Kong flora indicates that about three-fifths
  of the species are common to the Indian region, and nearly all the
  remainder are either Chinese or local forms. The number of species
  common to southern China, Japan and northern Asia is small. The
  cultivated plants of China are, with a few exceptions, the same as
  those of India South China, therefore seems, botanically hardly
  distinct from the great Indian region, into which many Chinese forms
  penetrate, as before noticed. The flora of north China, which is akin
  to that of Japan, shows manifest relation to that of the neighbouring
  American continent, from which many temperate forms extend, reaching
  to the Himalaya, almost as far as Kashmir. Very little is known of the
  plants of the interior of northern China, but it seems probable that a
  complete botanical connexion is established between it and the
  temperate region of the Himalaya.

    Central Asia.

  The vegetation of the dry region of central Asia is remarkable for the
  great relative number of Chenopodiaceae, _Salicornia_ and other salt
  plants being common; Polygonaceae also are abundant, leafless forms
  being of frequent occurrence, which gives the vegetation a very
  remarkable aspect. Peculiar forms of Leguminosae also prevail, and
  these with many of the other plants of the southern and drier regions
  of Siberia, or of the colder regions of the desert tracts of Persia
  and Afghanistan, extend into Tibet, where the extreme drought and the
  hot (nearly vertical) sun combine to produce a summer climate not
  greatly differing from that of the plains of central Asia.

    Zoological Regions.

  _Fauna._--The zoological provinces of Asia correspond very closely
  with the botanical. The northern portion of Asia, as far south as the
  Himalaya, is not zoologically distinct from Europe, and these two
  areas, with the strip of Africa north of the Atlas, constitute the
  Palaearctic region of Dr. Sclater, whose zoological primary divisions
  of the earth have met with the general approval of naturalists. The
  south-eastern portion of Asia with the adjacent islands of Sumatra,
  Java, Borneo and the Philippines, form his Indian region. The extreme
  south-west part of the continent constitutes a separate zoological
  district, comprising Arabia, Palestine and southern Persia, and
  reaching, like the hot desert botanical tract, to Baluchistan and
  Sind, it belongs to what Dr. Sclater calls the Ethiopian region, which
  extends over Africa, south of the Atlas. Celebes, Papua, and the other
  islands east of Java beyond Wallace's line fall within the Australian
  region.

    Mammals and birds.

  Nearly all the mammals of Europe also occur in northern Asia, where
  however, the Palaearctic fauna is enriched by numerous additional
  species. The characteristic groups belong mostly to forms which are
  restricted to cold and temperate regions. Consequently the Quadrumana,
  or monkeys, are nearly unrepresented, a single species occurring in
  Japan, and one or two others in northern China and Tibet.
  Insectivorous bats are numerous, but the frugivorous division of this
  order is only represented by a single species in Japan. Carnivora are
  also numerous, particularly the frequenters of cold climates, such as
  bears, weasels, wolves and foxes. Of the Insectivora, numerous forms
  of moles, shrews and hedgehogs prevail. The Rodents are also well
  represented by various squirrels, mice, and hares. Characteristic
  forms ot this order in northern Asia are the marmots (_Arctomys_) and
  the pikas or tailless hares (_Lagomys_). The great order of Ungulata
  is represented by various forms of sheep, as many as ten or twelve
  wild species of _Ovis_ being met with in the mountain chains of Asia,
  and more sparingly by several peculiar forms of antelope, such as the
  saiga (_Saiga tatarica_) and the _Gazella gutturosa_, or yellow sheep.
  Coming to the deer, we also meet with characteristic forms in northern
  Asia, especially those belonging to the typical genus _Cervus_. The
  musk deer (_Moschus_) is also quite restricted to northern Asia, and
  is one of its most peculiar types.

  The ornithology ot northern Asia is even more closely allied to that
  of Europe than the mammal fauna. Nearly three fourths of the
  well-known species of Europe extend through Siberia into the islands
  of the Japanese empire. Here again, we have an absence of all tropical
  forms, and a great development of groups characteristic of cold and
  temperate regions. One of the most peculiar of these is the genus
  _Phasianus_, of which splendid birds all the species are restricted in
  their wild state to northern Asia. The still more magnificently clad
  gold pheasants (_Thaumalea_), and the eared pheasants (_Crossoptilon_)
  are also confined to certain districts in the mountains of north
  eastern Asia. Amongst the _Passeres_, such forms as the larks, stone
  chats, finches, linnets, and grosbeaks are well developed and exhibit
  many species.

  The mammal fauna of the Indian region of Asia is much more highly
  developed than that of the Palaearctic. The Quadrumana are represented
  by several peculiar genera, amongst which are _Semnopithecus_,
  _Hylobates_ and _Simia_. Two peculiar forms of the Lemurine group are
  also met with. Both the insectivorous and frugivorous divisions of the
  bats are well represented. Amongst the Insectivora very peculiar forms
  are found, such as _Gymnura_ and _Tupaia_. The _Carnivora_ are
  likewise numerous, and this region may be considered as the true home
  of the tiger, though this animal has wandered far north into the
  Palaearctic division of Asia. Other characteristic Carnivora are
  civets, various ichneumons, and the benturong (_Arctictis_). Two
  species of bears are likewise restricted to the Indian region. In the
  order of Rodents squirrels are very numerous and porcupines of two
  genera are met with. The Indian region is the home of the Indian
  elephant--one of the two sole remaining representatives of the order
  Proboscidea. Of the Ungulates, four species of rhinoceros and one of
  tapir are met with, besides several peculiar forms of the swine
  family. The Bovidae or hollow-horned ruminants, are represented by
  several genera of antelopes, and by species of true _Bos_--such as _B.
  sondaicus_, _B. frontalis_ and _B. bubalus_. Deer are likewise
  numerous, and the peculiar group of chevrotains (_Tragulus_) is
  characteristic of the Indian region. Finally, this region affords us
  representatives of the order Edentata, in the shape of several species
  of _Manis_, or scaly ant-eater.

  The assemblage of birds of the Indian region is one of the richest and
  most varied in the world, being surpassed only by that of tropical
  America. Nearly every order, except that of the Struthiones or
  ostriches, is well represented, and there are many peculiar genera not
  found elsewhere, such as _Buceros_, _Harpactes_, _Lophophorus_,
  _Euplocamus_, _Pajo_ and _Ceriornis_. The _Phasianidae_ (exclusive of
  true _Phasianus_) are highly characteristic ot this region, as are
  likewise certain genera of barbets (_Megalaema_), parrots
  (_Palaeornis_), and crows (_Dendrocitta_, _Urocissa_ and _Cissa_). The
  family _Eurylaemidae_ is entirely confined to this part of Asia.

  The Ethiopian fauna plays but a subordinate part in Asia, intruding
  only into the south-western corner, and occupying the desert districts
  of Arabia and Syria, although some of the characteristic species reach
  still farther into Persia and Sind, and even into western India. The
  lion and the hunting leopard, which may be considered as in this epoch
  at least, Ethiopian types extend thus far, besides various species of
  jerboa and other desert-loving forms.

  In the birds, the Ethiopian type is shown by the prevalence of larks
  and stone chats, and by the complete absence of the many peculiar
  genera of the Indian region.

  The occurrence of mammals of the Marsupial order in the Molucca
  Islands and Celebes, while none have been found in the adjacent
  islands of Java and Borneo, lying on the west of Wallace's line, or in
  the Indian region, shows that the margin of the Australian region has
  here been reached. The same conclusion is indicated by the absence
  from the Moluccas and Celebes of various other Mammals, Quadrumana,
  Carnivora, Insectivora and Ruminants, which abound in the western part
  of the Archipelago. Deer do not extend into New Guinea, in which
  island the genus _Sus_ appears to have its eastern limit. A peculiar
  form of baboon, _Cynopithecus_, and the singular ruminant, _Anoa_,
  found in Celebes, seem to have no relation to Asiatic animals, and
  rather to be allied to those in Africa.

  The birds of these islands present similar peculiarities. Those of the
  Indian region abruptly disappear at, and many Australian forms reach
  but do not pass, the line above spoken of. Species of birds akin to
  those of Africa also occur in Celebes.

  Of the marine orders of Sirenia and Cetacea the Dugong, _Halicore_, is
  exclusively found in the Indian Ocean and a dolphin, _Platanista_,
  peculiar to the Ganges, ascends that river to a great distance from
  the sea.

    Fishes.

  Of the sea fishes of Asia, among the Acanthopterygii, or spiny-rayed
  fishes, the _Percidae_, or perches, are largely represented, the genus
  _Serranus_, which has only one species in Europe, is very numerous in
  Asia, and the forms are very large. Other allied genera are abundant
  and extend from the Indian seas to eastern Africa. The Squamipennes,
  or scaly-finned fishes, are principally found in the seas of southern
  Asia, and especially near coral reefs. The _Mullidae_ or red mullets
  are largely represented by genera differing from those of Europe. The
  _Polynemidae_, which range from the Atlantic through the Indian Ocean
  to the Pacific, supply animals from which isinglass is prepared; one
  of them, the mango fish, esteemed a great delicacy, inhabits the seas
  from the Bay of Bengal to Siam. The _Sciaenidae_ extend from the Bay
  of Bengal to China, but are not known to the westward. The
  _Stromateidae_, or pomfrets, resemble the dory, a Mediterranean form,
  and extend to China and the Pacific. The sword fishes _Xiphidae_, the
  lancet fishes, _Acanthuridae_, and the scabbard fishes, _Trichuridae_,
  are distributed through the seas of south Asia. Mackerels of various
  genera abound, as well as gobies, blenniesm and mullets.

  Among the Anacanthim, the cod family so well known in Europe shows but
  one or two species in the seas of south Asia, though the soles and
  allied fishes are numerous along the coasts. Of the Physostomi, the
  siluroids are abundant in the estuaries and muddy waters; the habits
  of some of these fishes are remarkable, such as that of the males
  carrying the ova in their mouths till the young are hatched. The small
  family of _Scopelidae_ affords the gelatinous _Harpodon_, or bumalo.
  The gar-fish and flying fishes are numerous, extending into the seas
  of Europe. The _Clupeidae_ or herrings, are most abundant, and
  anchovies, or sardines, are found in shoals, but at irregular and
  uncertain intervals. The marine eels, _Muraenidae_, are more numerous
  towards the Malay Archipelago than in the Indian seas. Forms of
  sea-horses (_Hippocampus_), pipe-fishes (_Syngnathus_), fife-fishes
  (_Sclerodermus_), and sun-fish, globe-fish, and other allied forms of
  _Gymnodontes_, are not uncommon.

  Of the cartilaginous fishes, Chondropterygii, the true sharks and
  hammer-headed sharks, are numerous. The dog-fish also is found, one
  species extending from the Indian seas to the Cape of Good Hope. The
  saw-fishes, _Pristidae_, the electrical rays, _Torpedinae_, and
  ordinary rays and skates, are also found in considerable numbers.

  The fresh waters of southern Asia are deficient in the typical forms
  of the Acanthopterygii, and are chiefly inhabited by carp, siluroids,
  simple or spined eels, and the walking and climbing fishes. The
  _Siluridae_ attain their chief development in tropical regions. Only
  one _Silurus_ is found in Europe, and the same species extends to
  southern Asia and Africa. The _Salmonidae_ are entirely absent from
  the waters of southern Asia, though they exist in the rivers that flow
  into the Arctic Ocean and the neighbouring parts of the northern
  Pacific, extending perhaps to Formosa; and trout, though unknown in
  Indian rivers, are found beyond the watershed of the Indus, in the
  streams flowing into the Caspian. The _Cyprinidae_, or carp, are
  largely represented in southern Asia, and there grow to a size unknown
  in Europe; a _Barbus_ in the Tigris has been taken of the weight of
  300 lb. The chief development of this family, both as to size and
  number of forms, is in the mountain regions with a temperate climate;
  the smaller species are found in the hotter regions and in the
  low-lying rivers. Of the _Clupeidae_, or herrings, numerous forms
  occur in Asiatic waters, ascending the rivers many hundred miles; one
  of the best-known of Indian fishes, the hilsa, is of this family. The
  sturgeons, which abound in the Black Sea and Caspian, and ascend the
  rivers that fall into them, are also found in Asiatic Russia, and an
  allied form extends to southern China. The walking or climbing fishes,
  which are peculiar to south-eastern Asia and Africa, are organized so
  as to be able to breathe when out of the water, and they are thus
  fitted to exist under conditions which would be fatal to other fishes,
  being suited to live in the regions of periodical drought and rain in
  which they are found.

    Insects.

  The insects of all southern Asia, including India south of the
  Himalaya, China, Siam and the Malayan Islands, belong to one group;
  not only the genera, but even the species are often the same on the
  opposite sides of the Bay of Bengal. The connexion with Africa is
  marked by the occurrence of many genera common to Africa and India,
  and confined to those two regions, and similarities of form are not
  uncommon there in cases in which the genera are not peculiar. Of
  Coleopterous insects known to inhabit east Siberia, nearly one-third
  are found in western Europe. The European forms seem to extend to
  about 30° N., south of which the Indo-Malayan types are met with,
  Japan being of the Europeo-Asiatic group. The northern forms extend
  generally along the south coast of the Mediterranean up to the border
  of the great desert, and from the Levant to the Caspian.

    Domesticated animals.

  Of the domesticated animals of Asia may first be mentioned the
  elephant. It does not breed in captivity, and is not found wild west
  of the Jumna river in northern India. The horse is produced, in the
  highest perfection in Arabia and the hot and dry countries of western
  Asia. Ponies are most esteemed from the wetter regions of the east,
  and the hilly tracts. Asses are abundant in most places, and two wild
  species occur. The horned cattle include the humped oxen and buffaloes
  of India, and the yak of Tibet. A hybrid between the yak and Indian
  cattle, called zo, is commonly reared in Tibet and the Himalaya. Sheep
  abound in the more temperate regions, and goats are universally met
  with; both of these animals are used as beasts of burden in the
  mountains of Tibet. The reindeer of northern Siberia call also for
  special notice; they are used for the saddle as well as for draught.
       (R. S.)

  ETHNOLOGY

    Racial types.

  Asia, including its outlying islands, has become the dwelling-place of
  all the great families into which the races of men have been divided.
  By far the largest area is occupied by the Mongolian group. These have
  yellow-brown skins, black eyes and hair, flat noses and oblique eyes.
  They are short in stature, with little hair on the body and face. In
  general terms they extend, with modifications of character probably
  due to admixture with other types and to varying conditions of life,
  over the whole of northern Asia as far south as the plains bordering
  the Caspian Sea, including Tibet and China, and also over the
  Indo-Malayan peninsula and Archipelago, excepting Papua and some of
  the more eastern islands.

  Next in numerical importance to the Mongolians are the races which
  have been called by Professor Huxley _Melanochroic_ and
  _Xanthochroic_. The former includes the dark-haired people of southern
  Europe, and extends over North Africa, Asia Minor, Syria to
  south-western Asia, and through Arabia and Persia to India. The latter
  race includes the fair-haired people of northern Europe, and extends
  over nearly the same area as the Melanochroi, with which race it is
  greatly intermixed. The Xanthochroi have fair skins, blue eyes and
  light hair; and others have dark skins, eyes and hair, and are of a
  slighter frame. Together they constitute what were once called the
  Caucasian races. The Melanochroi are not considered by Huxley to be
  one of the primitive modifications of mankind, but rather to be the
  result of the admixture of the Xanthochroi with the Australoid type,
  next to be mentioned.

  The third group is that of the Australoid type. Their hair is dark,
  generally soft, never woolly. The eyes and skin are dark, the beard
  often well developed, the nose broad and flat, the lips coarse, and
  jaws heavy. This race is believed to form the basis of the people of
  the Indian peninsula, and of some of the hill tribes of central India,
  to whom the name Dravidian has been given, and by its admixture with
  the Melanochroic group to have given rise to the ordinary population
  of the Indian provinces. It is also probable that the Australoid
  family extends into south Arabia and Egypt.

  The last group, the Negroid, is represented by the races to which has
  been given the name of _Negrito_, from the small size of some of them.
  They are closely akin to the negroes of South Africa, and possess the
  characteristic dark skins, woolly but scanty beard and body hair,
  broad flat noses, and projecting lips of the African; and are diffused
  over the Andaman Islands, a part of the Malay peninsula, the
  Philippines, Papua, and some of the neighbouring islands. The Negritos
  appear to be derived from a mixture of the true Negro with the
  Australoid type.

    Mongolians.

  The distribution of the Mongolian group in Asia offers no particular
  difficulty. There is complete present, and probably previous
  long-existing, geographical continuity in the area over which they are
  found. There is also considerable similarity of climate and other
  conditions throughout the northern half of Asia which they occupy. The
  extension of modified forms of the Mongolian type over the whole
  American continent may be mentioned as a remarkable circumstance
  connected with this branch of the human race.

  The Mongolians of the northern half of Asia are almost entirely
  nomadic, hunters and shepherds or herdsmen. The least advanced of
  these, but far the most peaceful, are those that occupy Siberia.
  Farther south the best-known tribes are the Manchus, the Mongols
  proper, the Moguls and the Turks, all known under the name of Tatars,
  and to the ancients as Scythians, occupying from east to west the zone
  of Asia comprised between the 40th and 50th circles of N. lat. The
  Turks are Mahommedans; their tribes extend up the Oxus to the borders
  of Afghanistan and Persia, and to the Caspian, and under the name of
  Kirghiz into Russia, and their language is spoken over a large part of
  western Asia. Their letters are those of Persia. The Manchus and
  Mongols are chiefly Buddhist, with letters derived from the ancient
  Syriac. The Manchus are now said to be gradually falling under the
  influence of Chinese civilization, and to be losing their old nomadic
  habits, and even their peculiar language. The predatory habits of the
  Turkish, Mongolian and Manchu population of northern Asia, and their
  irruptions into other parts of the continent and into Europe, have
  produced very remarkable results in the history of the world.

  The Chinese branch of the Mongolian family are a thoroughly settled
  people of agriculturists and traders. They are partially Buddhist, and
  have a peculiar monosyllabic, uninflected language, with writing
  consisting of symbols, which represent words, not letters.

  The countries lying between India and the Mongolian are occupied by
  populations chiefly of the Mongolian and Chinese type, having
  languages fundamentally monosyllabic, but using letters derived from
  India, and adopting their religion, which is almost everywhere
  Buddhist, from the Indians. Of these may be named the Tibetans, the
  Burmese and the Siamese. Cochin-China is more nearly Chinese in all
  respects. It is known that to the Tibeto-Chinese modifications of the
  pure Mongolian type all the eastern Burmese tribes--Chins, Kachins,
  Shans, &c.--belong (as indeed do the Burmese themselves), and that a
  cognate race occupies the Himalaya to the eastern limits of Kashmir.

  Some light has been thrown on the connexion between the Tibetan race
  and certain tribes of central India, the Bhils and Kols; and it seems
  more probable that these tribes are the remnants of a Mongolian race
  which first displaced a yet earlier Negroid population, and was then
  itself shouldered out by a Caucasian irruption, than that they entered
  India by any of the northern passages within historic times. Mongolian
  settlements have lately been found very much farther extended into the
  border countries of north-west India than has been hitherto
  recognized. The Mingals, who, conjointly with the Brahuis, occupy the
  hills south of Kalat to the limits of the Rajput province of Las Bela,
  claim Mongolian descent, and traces of a Mongolian colony have been
  found in Makran.

    Malays.

  The Malays, who occupy the peninsula and most of the islands of the
  Archipelago called after them, are Mongols apparently modified by
  their very different climate, and by the maritime life forced upon
  them by the physical conditions of the region they inhabit. As they
  are now known to us, they have undergone a process of partial
  civilization, first at the hands of the Brahminical Indians, from whom
  they borrowed a religion, and to some extent literature and an
  alphabet, and subsequently from intercourse with the Arabs, which has
  led to the adoption of Mahommedanism by most of them.

    Aryans.

  The name of Aryan has been given to the races speaking languages
  derived from, or akin to, the ancient form of Sanskrit, who now occupy
  the temperate zone extending from the Mediterranean, across the
  highlands of Asia Minor, Persia and Afghanistan, to India. The races
  speaking the languages akin to the ancient Assyrian, which are now
  mainly represented by Arabic, have been called Semitic, and occupy the
  countries south-west of Persia, including Syria and Arabia, besides
  extending into North Africa. Though the languages of these races are
  very different they cannot be regarded as physically distinct, and
  they are both without doubt branches of the Melanochroi, modified by
  admixture with the neighbouring races, the Mongols, the Australoids
  and the Xanthochroi.

  The Aryans of India are probably the most settled and civilized of all
  Asiatic races. This type is found in its purest form in the north and
  north-west, while the mixed races and the population referred to the
  Australoid type predominate in the peninsula and southern India. The
  spoken languages of northern India are very various, differing one
  from another in the sort of degree that English differs from German,
  though all are thoroughly Sanskritic in their vocables, but with an
  absence of Sanskrit grammar that has given rise to considerable
  discussion. The languages of the south are Dravidian, not Sanskritic.
  The letters of both classes of languages, which also vary
  considerably, are all modifications of the ancient Pali, and probably
  derived from the Dravidians, not from the Aryans. They are written
  from left to right, exception being made of Urdu or Hindostani, the
  mixed language of the Mahommedan conquerors of northern India, the
  character used for writing which is the Persian. From the river Sutlej
  and the borders of the Sind desert, as far as Burma and to Ceylon, the
  religion of the great bulk of the people of India is Hindu or
  Brahminical, though the Mahommedans are often numerous, and in some
  places even in a majority. West of the Sutlej the population of Asia
  may be said to be wholly Mahommedan with the exception of certain
  relatively small areas in Asia Minor and Syria, where Christians
  predominate. The language of the Punjab does not differ very
  materially from that of Upper India. West of the Indus the dialects
  approach more to Persian, which language meets Arabic and Turki west
  of the Tigris, and along the Turkoman desert and the Caspian. Through
  the whole of this tract the letters are used which are common to
  Persian, Arabic and Turkish, written from right to left.

    Racial distribution.

  Considerable progress has been made in the classification of the
  various races which occupy the continent to the west of the great
  Mongolian region. The ancient Sacae, or Scyths, are recognized in the
  Aryan population, who may be found in great numbers and in their
  purest form in the more inaccessible mountains and glens of the
  central highlands. These Tajiks (as they are usually called) form the
  underlying population of Persia, Baluchistan, Afghanistan and
  Badakshan, and their language (in the central districts of Asia) is
  found to contain words of Aryan or Sanskrit derivation which are not
  known in Persian. They have been for the most part dispossessed of
  their country by Turkish immigration and conquests, but they still
  retain their original intellectual superiority over the Turkish and
  other mixed tribes by which they are surrounded. Uzbegs and Kirghiz
  have but small affinity with the Mongol element of Asia. They are the
  representatives of those countless Turkish irruptions which have taken
  place through all history. Of the two divisions (Kara Kirghiz and
  Kassak Kirghiz) into which the Kirghiz tribes are divided by Russian
  authorities, the Kassak Kirghiz is the more closely allied to the
  Mongol type; the Kara Kirghiz, who are found principally in the
  valleys of the Tian-shan and Altai mountains, being unmistakably
  Turkish. The Kipchaks are only a Kirghiz clan. The language of the
  Kirghiz is Turki and their religion that of Mahomet. As a nomadic
  people they have great contempt for the Sarts, who represent the town
  dwellers of the tribe. The Kalmucks are a Buddhist and Mongolian
  people who originated in a confederacy of tribes dwelling in
  Dzungaria, migrated to Siberia, and settled on the Lower Volga. From
  thence they returned late in the 18th century to the reoccupation of
  their old ground in Kulja under the Chinese. The Turkoman is the
  purest form of the Turk element, and his language is the purest form
  of the Turkish tongue, which is represented at Constantinople by a
  comparatively mongrel, or mixed, dialect. Ethnographers have traced a
  connexion between the Turkoman of central Asia and the Teutonic races
  of Europe, based on a similarity of national customs and immemorial
  usage. Evidence of an original affinity between Turkoman and Rajput
  has also been found in the mutual possession by these races of a ruddy
  skin, so that as ethnographical inquiry advances the Turk appears to
  recede from his Mongolian affinities and to approach the Caucasian.
  Turks and Mongols alike were doubtless included under the term Scyth
  by the ancients, and as Tatars by more modern writers, insomuch that
  the Turkish dynasty at Delhi, founded by Baber, is usually termed the
  Mogul dynasty, although there can be no distinction traced between the
  terms Mogul and Mongol. The general results of recent inquiry into the
  ethnography of Afghanistan is to support the general correctness of
  Bellew's theories of the origin of the Afghan races. The claim of the
  Durani Afghan to be a true Ben-i-Israel is certainly in no way
  weakened by any recent investigation. The influence of Greek culture
  in northern India is fully recognized, and the distribution of Greek
  colonies previous to Alexander's time is attested by practical
  knowledge of the districts they were said to occupy. The _habitat_ of
  the Nysaeana, and the identity of certain tribes of Kafiristan with
  the descendants of these pre-Alexandrian colonists from the west, are
  also well established. To this day hymns are unwittingly sung to
  Bacchus in the dales and glens of Kafiristan. The ethnographical
  status of the mixed tribes of the mountains that lie between Chitral
  and the Peshawar plains has been fairly well fixed by John Biddulph,
  and much patient inquiry in the vast fields of Baluchistan by Major
  Mockler, G.P. Tate and others has resulted in quite a new appreciation
  of the tribal origin of the great conglomeration of Baluch peoples.

  The result of trans-border surveys to the north and west of India has
  been to establish the important geographical fact that it is by two
  gateways only, one on the north-west and one on the west of India,
  that the central Asiatic tides of immigration have flowed into the
  peninsula. The Kabul valley indicates the north-western entrance, and
  Makran indicates that on the west. By the Kabul valley route, which
  includes at its head the group of passes across the Hindu Kush which
  extend from the Khawak to the Kaoshan, all those central Asian hordes,
  be they Sacae, Yue-chi, Jats, Goths or Huns, who were driven towards
  the rich plains of the south, entered the Punjab. Some of them
  migrated from districts which belong to eastern Asia, but none of them
  penetrated into India by eastern passes. Such tides as set towards the
  Himalaya broke against their farther buttresses, leaving an
  interesting ethnographical flotsam in the northern valleys; but they
  never overflowed the Himalayan barrier. Later most of the historic
  invasions of India from central Asia followed the route which leads
  directly from Kabul to Peshawar and Delhi.

  By the western gates of Makran prehistoric irruptions from Mesopotamia
  broke into the plains of Lower Sind, and either passed on towards the
  central provinces of India or were absorbed in the highlands south of
  Kalat. In later centuries the Arabs from the west reached the valley
  of the Indus by their western route, and there established a dynasty
  which lasted for 300 years. The identification of existing peoples
  with the various Scythic, Persian and Arab races who have passed from
  High Asia into the Indian borderland, has opened up a vast field of
  ethnographical inquiry which has hardly yet found adequate workers for
  its investigation. To such fields may be added the yet more
  complicated problems of those reflex waves which flowed backwards from
  India into the border highlands.     (T. H. H.*)

HISTORY

1. The borders assigned to Asia on the west are somewhat arbitrary. The
Urals indicate no real division of races, and in both Greek and Turkish
times Asia Minor has been connected with the opposite shores of Europe
rather than with the lands lying to the east. A juster view of early
history is probably obtained by thinking of the countries round the
Mediterranean as interacting on one another than by separating Palestine
and Asia Minor as Asiatic.

  Asiatic characteristics.

2. The words "Asiatic" and "Oriental" are often used as if they denoted
a definite and homogeneous type, but Russians resemble Asiatics in many
ways, and Turks, Hindus, Chinese, &c., differ in so many important
points that the common substratum is small. It amounts to this, that
Asiatics stand on a higher level than the natives of Africa or America,
but do not possess the special material civilization of western Europe.
As far as any common mental characteristic can be assigned it is also
somewhat negative, namely, that Asiatics have not the same sentiment of
independence and freedom as Europeans. Individuals are thought of as
members of a family, state or religion, rather than as entities with a
destiny and rights of their own. This leads to autocracy in politics,
fatalism in religion and conservatism in both. Hence, too, Asiatic
history has large and simple outlines. Though longer chronologically
than the annals of Europe, it is less eventful, less diversified and
offers fewer personalities of interest. But the same conditions which
render individual eminence difficult procure for it when once attained a
more ready recognition, and the conquerors and prophets of Asia have had
more power and authority than their parallels in Europe. Jenghiz Khan
and Timur covered more ground than Napoleon, and no European has had
such an effect on the world as Mahomet.

  Religion and civilisation.

3. Attention has often been called to the religious character of Asia.
Not only the great religions of the world--Buddhism, Christianity,
Islam--but those of secondary importance, such as Judaism, Parseeism,
Taoism, are all Asiatic. No European race left to itself has developed
any thing more than an unsystematic paganism. It is true that Greek
philosophy advanced far beyond this stage, but it produced nothing
sufficiently popular to be called a religion. On the other hand
Christianity, though Asiatic in its origin and essential ideas, has to a
large extent taken its present form on European soil, and some of its
most important manifestations--notably the Roman Church--are European
reconstructions in which little of the Asiatic element remains.
Christianity has made little way farther east then Asia Minor. Modern
missions have made no great conquests there, and in earlier times the
Nestorians and Jacobites who penetrated to central Asia, China and
India, received respectful hearing, but never had anything like the
success which attended Buddhism and Islam. Yet Buddhism has never made
much impression west of India; and Islam is clearly repugnant to
Europeans, for even when under Moslem rule (as in Turkey) they refuse to
accept it in a far larger proportion than did the Hindus in similar
circumstances. Hence there is clearly a deep-seated difference between
the religious feelings of the two continents.

Since Asiatic records go back much farther than those of Europe, it is
natural that Asia should be thought the birthplace of civilization. But
this originality cannot be absolute, for, whatever may have been the
relations of Babylonia and the Aryans, the latter brought civilization
to India from the west, and it is not always clear whether similarity of
government and institutions is the result of borrowing or of parallel
development. Both in Europe and in Asia small feudal or aristocratic
states tended to consolidate themselves into monarchies, but whereas in
Europe from the early days of Rome onwards royalty has often been driven
out and replaced temporarily or permanently by popular government, this
change seems not to occur in Asia, where revolution means only a change
of dynasty. The few cases where the government is not monarchical, as
Arabia, seem to represent the persistence of very ancient conditions.

The contemplation of Asia suggests that progress is most rapid when
accompanied by the migration of races or the transplantation of ideas
and institutions. Thus Greece excelled the Eastern countries from whom
she may have derived her civilization, and Buddhism had a far more
brilliant career outside India than in it.

  General historical outlines.

4. In many parts of southern Asia are found semi-barbarous races
representing the earliest known stratum of population, such as the
Veddahs of Ceylon, and various tribes in China and the Malay
Archipelago. Some of them offer analogies to the Australians. This
connexion, if true, must be very ancient, since it apparently goes back
to a time when the distribution of land and water was other than at
present. In northern Asia are found other aborigines, such as the Ainus
of Japan and the so-called hyperborean races (Chukchis, &c.), but no
materials are at present forthcoming for their history. There is some
record of the migrations of the later races superimposed on these
aborigines. The Chinese came from the west, though how far west is
unknown: the Hindus and Persians from the north-west: the Burmese and
Siamese from the north. We do not know if the Mongols, Turks, &c., had
any earlier home than central Asia, but their extensive movements from
that region are historical.

The antiquity of Asiatic history is often exaggerated. With the
exception of Babylonia and Assyria, we can hardly even conjecture what
was the condition of this continent much before 1500 B.C. At that period
the Chinese were advancing along the Hwang-ho, and the Aryans were
entering India from the north-west. Both were in conflict with earlier
races. The influence of Babylonian civilization was probably widespread.
Some connexion between Babylonia and China is generally admitted, and
all Indian alphabets seem traceable to a Semitic original borrowed in
the course of commerce from the Persian Gulf.

Apart from European conquests, the internal history of Asia in the last
2000 years is the result of the interaction of four main influences: (a)
Chinese, (b) Indian, (c) Mahommedan, (d) Central Asian. Of these the
first three represent different types of civilization: the fourth has
little originality, but has been of great importance in affecting the
distribution of races and political power.

(a) China has moulded the civilization of the eastern mainland and
Japan, without much affecting the Malay Archipelago. In the sphere of
direct influence fall Korea, Japan and Annam; in the outer sphere are
Mongolia, Tibet, Siam, Cambodia and Burma, where Indian and Chinese
influence are combined, the Indian being often the stronger. These
countries, except Japan, have all been at some time at least nominal
tributaries of China. Where Chinese influence had full play it
introduced Confucianism, a special style in art and the Chinese system
of writing. After the Christian era it was accompanied by Chinese
Buddhism. The cumbrous Chinese script maintains itself in the Far East,
but has not advanced west of China proper and Annam.

(b) Indian influence may be defined as Buddhism, if it is understood
that Buddhism is not at all periods clearly distinguishable from
Hinduism. Its sphere includes Indo-China, much of the Malay Archipelago,
Tibet and Mongolia, Moreover, China and Japan themselves may be said to
fall within this sphere, in view of the part which Buddhism has played
in their development. The Buddhist influence is not merely religious,
for it is always accompanied by Indian art and literature, and often by
an Indian alphabet. Much of this art is Greek in origin, being derived
from the Perso-Greek states on the north-west frontiers of India. Indian
alphabets have spread to Tibet, Cambodia, Java and Korea. The history of
Indian civilization in Indo-China and the Archipelago is still obscure,
in spite of the existence of gigantic ruins, but it would appear that in
some parts at least two periods must be distinguished, first the
introduction of Hinduism (or mixed Hinduism and Buddhism), perhaps under
Indian princes, and secondly a later and more purely ecclesiastical
introduction of Sinhalese Buddhism, with its literature and art.

(c) Mahommedanism or Islam is perhaps the greatest transforming force
which the world has seen. It has profoundly affected and to a large
extent subjugated all western Asia including India, all eastern and
northern Africa as well as Spain, and all eastern Europe. Its open
advocacy of force attracts warlike races, and the intensity of its
influence is increased by the fusion of secular and religious power, so
that the Moslem Church is a Moslem state characterized by slavery,
polygamy, and, subject to the autocracy of the ruler, by the theoretical
equality of Moslems, who in political status are superior to
non-Moslems. Thus, whenever the population of a Moslem country is of
mixed belief, a ruling caste of Moslems is formed, as in Turkey at the
present day and India under the Moguls. Islam is paramount in Turkey,
Persia, Arabia and Afghanistan. India is the dividing line: Islam is
strong in northern and central India, weaker in the south. But only
one-fifth of the whole population is Moslem. Beyond India it has spread
to Malacca and the Malay Archipelago, where it overwhelmed Hindu
civilization, and reached the southern Philippines. But it made no
progress in Indo-China or Japan; and though there is a large Moslem
population in China the Chinese influence has been stronger, for alone
of all Asiatics the Chinese have succeeded in forcing Islam to accept
the ordinary limitations of a religion and to take its place as a creed
parallel to Buddhism or any other.

Even more than Buddhism Islam has carried with it a special style of art
and civilization. It is usually accompanied by the use of the Arabic
alphabet, and in the languages of Moslem nations (notably Turkish,
Persian, Hindustani and Malay) a large proportion of the vocabulary is
borrowed from Arabic. Hindi and Hindustani, two forms of the same
language as spoken by Hindus and Mahommedans respectively, are a curious
example of how deeply religion may affect culture.

(d) The great part which central Asian tribes have played in history is
obscured by the absence of any common name for them. Linguistically they
can be divided into several groups such as Turks, Mongols and Huns, but
they were from time to time united into states representing more than
one group, and their armies were recruited, like the Janissaries, from
all the military races in the neighbourhood. Soon after the Christian
era central Asia began to boil over, and at least seven great invasions
and more or less complete conquests can be ascribed to these tribes
without counting minor movements, (i.) The early invasions of Europe by
the Avars, Huns and Bulgarians. (ii.) The invasion and temporary
subjection of Russia by the Mongols, who penetrated as far west as
Silesia, (iii.) The conquests of Timur. (iv.) The conquest of Asia Minor
and eastern Europe by the Turks. (v.) The conquest of India by the
Moguls. (vi.) The conquest of China by the Mongols under Kublai. (vii.)
The later conquest of China by the Manchus. To these may be added
numerous lesser invasions of India, China and Persia.

These tribes have a genius for warfare rather than for government, art
or literature, and with few exceptions (e.g. the Moguls in India) have
proved poor administrators. Apart from conquest their most important
function has been to keep up communications in central Asia, and to
transport religions and civilizations from one region to another. Thus
they are mainly responsible for the introduction of Islam with its
Arabic or Persian civilization into India and Europe, and in earlier
times their movements facilitated the infiltration of Graeco-Bactrian
civilization into India, besides maintaining communication between China
and the West.

5. _Babylonia and Assyria._--The movements mentioned above have been the
chief factors of relatively modern Asiatic history, but in early times
the centre of activity and culture lay farther west, in Babylonia and
Assyria. These ancient states began to decline in the 7th century B.C.,
and on their ruins rose the Persian empire, which with various political
metamorphoses continued to be an important power till the 7th century
A.D., after which all western Asia was overwhelmed by the Moslem wave,
and old landmarks and kingdoms were obliterated.

The materials for the study of their institutions and population are
abundant, but lend themselves to discussion rather than to a summary of
admitted facts. In the early history of south-western Asia the Semites
form the most important ethnic group, which is primarily linguistic but
also shares other remarkable characteristics. Two of the greatest
religions of the world, Christianity and Islam, are Semitic in origin,
as well as Judaism. In politics these races have been less successful in
modern times, but the Semitic states of Babylonia and Assyria were once
the principal centres for the development and distribution of
civilization. It is generally agreed that this civilization can be
traced back to an earlier race, the Sumero-Akkadians, whose language
seems allied to the agglutinative idioms of central Asia. If this
ancient civilized race was really allied to the ancestors of the Turks
and Huns, it is a remarkable instance of how civilization thrives best
by being transplanted at a certain period of growth. Still less is known
of the early non-Aryan races of Asia Minor such as the Hittites and
Alorodians. One hypothesis supposes that the shores of the Mediterranean
were originally inhabited by a homogeneous race neither Aryan nor
Semitic.

The earliest Sumerian records seem to be anterior to 4000 B.C. Shortly
after that period Babylonia was invaded by Semites, who became the
ruling race. The city of Babylon came to the fore as metropolis about
2285 B.C. under Khammurabi. Assyria was an offshoot of Babylonia lying
to the north-west, and apparently colonized before the second
millennium. While using the same language as the Babylonians, the
Assyrians had an individuality which showed itself in art and religion.
In the 9th and 8th centuries B.C. they became the chief power within
their sphere and the suzerain of their parent Babylon. But they
succumbed before the advance of the Medo-Persian power in 606 B.C.,
whereas it was not till 555 that Cyrus took Babylon. Assyria, being
essentially a military power, disappeared with the destruction of
Nineveh, but Babylon continued to exercise an influence on culture and
religion for many centuries after the Persian conquest.

6. _China._--This is the oldest of existing states, though its authentic
history does not go back much beyond 1000 B.C. It is generally admitted
that there was some connexion between the ancient civilizations of China
and Babylonia, but its precise nature is still uncertain. It is clear,
however, that the Chinese came from the west, and entered their present
territory along the course of the Hwang-ho at an unknown period,
possibly about 3000 B.C. In early historical times China consisted of a
shifting confederacy of feudal states, but about 220 B.C. the state of
Tsin or Chin (whence the name China) came into prominence, and succeeded
in forming a homogeneous empire, which advanced considerably towards the
south. The subsequent history of China is mainly a record of struggles
with various tribes, commonly, but not very correctly, called Tatars.
The empire was frequently broken up by successful incursions, or divided
between rival dynasties, but at least twice became a great Asiatic
power: under the Han dynasty (about 200 B.C.-A.D. 220), and the T'ang
(A.D. 618-906). The dominions of the latter extended across central Asia
to northern India, but were dismembered by the attacks of the Kitans,
whence the name Cathay. China proper, minus these external provinces,
was again united under the Sung dynasty (960-1127), but split into the
northern (Tatar) and southern (Chinese) kingdoms. In the 13th century
arose the Mongol power, and Kublai Khan conquered China. The Mongol
dynasty lasted less than a century, but the Ming, the native Chinese
dynasty which succeeded it, reigned for nearly 300 years and despatched
expeditions which reached India, Ceylon and East Africa. In 1644 the
Ming succumbed to the attacks of the Manchus, a northern tribe who
captured Peking and founded the present imperial house.

Until the advent of Europeans, the Chinese were always in contact with
inferior races. Whether they expanded at the expense of weak aboriginal
tribes or were conquered by more robust invaders, Chinese civilization
prevailed and assimilated alike the conquered and the conquerors. It is
largely to this that we must ascribe the national conservatism and
contempt for foreigners. The spirit of the Chinese polity is
self-contained, anti-military and anti-sacerdotal. Rank is nominally
determined by merit, as tested by competitive examinations. Society is
conceived as regulated by mutual obligations, of which the duties of
parents and children are the most important. The emperor is head of the
state and the high priest, who sacrifices to Heaven on behalf of his
people, but he can be deposed, and no divine right is inherent in
certain families as in Japan and Turkey. On the contrary there have been
20 dynasties since the Christian era.

The most conspicuous figure in Chinese literature is Confucius (551-475
B.C.). Though he laid no claim to originality and merely sought to
collect and systematize the traditions of antiquity, his influence in
the Far East has been unbounded, and he must be pronounced one of the
most powerful advocates of peace and humanity that have ever existed.
Confucianism is an ethical rather than a religious system, and hence was
able to co-exist, though not on very friendly terms, with Buddhism,
which reached China about the 1st century A.D. and was the chief source
of Chinese religious ideas, except the older ancestor worship. But they
are not a religious people, and like many Europeans regard the church as
a department of the state.

7. _Japan_ appears to have been formerly inhabited by the Ainus, who
have traditions of an older but unknown population, but was invaded in
prehistoric times by a race akin to the Koreans, which was possibly
mingled with Malay elements after occupying the southern part of the
islands. Authentic history does not begin till about the 6th century
A.D., when Chinese civilization and Buddhism were introduced. The
government was originally autocratic, but as early as the 7th century
the most characteristic feature of Japanese politics--the power of great
families who overshadowed the throne--makes its appearance. We hear
first of the Fujiwara family, and then of the rivalry between the houses
of Taira and Minamoto. The latter prevailed, and in 1192 established the
dual system of government under which the emperor or Mikado ruled only
in name, and the real power was in the hands of a hereditary military
chief called Shogun. Japan has never been invaded in historical times,
but an attempt made by Kublai Khan to conquer it was successfully
repulsed. The chief power then passed to the Ashikaga dynasty of
Shoguns, who retained it for about 200 years and were distinguished for
their patronage of the arts. The second half of the 16th century was a
period of ferment and anarchy, marked by the arrival of the Portuguese
and the rise of some remarkable adventurers, one of whom, Hideyoshi,
conquered Korea and apparently meditated the invasion of China. His
plans were interrupted by his death, and his successor, Ieyasu, who
shaped the social and political life of Japan for nearly 300 years
(1603-1868), definitely decided on a policy of seclusion and isolation.
All ideas of external conquest were abandoned, Christianity was
forbidden, and Japan closed to foreigners, only the Dutch being allowed
a strictly limited commerce. In 1854-1859 the Christian powers,
beginning with the United States, successfully asserted their right to
trade with Japan. The influx of new ideas provoked civil war, in which
the already decadent Shogunate was abolished and the authority of the
Mikado restored. Recognizing that their only chance of competing with
Europeans was to fight them with their own weapons, the Japanese set
themselves deliberately to assimilate the material civilization and to
some extent the institutions of Europe, such as constitutional
government. Their progress and success are without parallel. In 1895
they defeated the Chinese and ten years later the Russians. Their
exceptional status among Asiatic nations has been recognized by treaties
which, contrary to the general practice in non-Christian countries,
place all foreigners in Japan under Japanese law.

This sudden development of the Japanese is perhaps the most important
event of the second half of the 19th century, since it marks the rise of
an Asiatic power capable of competing with Europe on equal terms. Their
history is so different from that of the rest of Asia that it is not
surprising if the result is different. The nation hardly came into
existence till China and India had passed their prime, and remained
secluded and free from the continual struggle against barbarian
invaders, which drained the energies of its neighbours. It was left
untouched by Mahommedanism, and for an unprecedentedly long period kept
Europeans at bay without wasting its strength in hostilities. The
military spirit was evolved, not in raids and massacres of the usual
Asiatic type which create little but intense racial hatred, but in feuds
between families and factions of the same race, which restrained
ferocity and tended to create a temper like that of the feudal chivalry
of Europe. On the other hand it is noticeable that the Japanese have
little which is original in the way of religion, literature or
philosophy. Unlike the Chinese and Indians, they have hitherto not had
the smallest influence on the intellectual development of Asia, and
though they have in the past sometimes shown themselves intensely
nationalist and conservative, they have, compared with India and China,
so little which is really their own that their assimilation of foreign
ideas is explicable.

8. _Korea_ received its civilization and religion from China, but
differs in language, and to some extent in customs. An alphabet derived
from Indian sources is in use as well as Chinese writing. The country
was at most periods independent though nominally tributary to China. In
the 16th century the Japanese occupied it for a short period, and in
1894 they went to war with China on account of her claims to suzerainty.
In 1895 Korea was declared independent.

9. _India._--The population of India comprises at least three strata:
firstly, uncivilized aborigines, such as the Kols and Santhals, and
secondly, the Dravidians (Tamils, Kanarese, &c.), who perhaps represent
the earliest northern invaders, and appear to have attained some degree
of culture on their own account. The most recent authorities are of
opinion that the Kolarians and Dravidians represent a single physical
type; but, whatever the historical explanation may be, they certainly
have different languages and show different stages of civilization. In
prehistoric times they were spread over the whole of India, but were
driven to the centre and south of the peninsula by the third stratum of
Aryans, and perhaps also by invasions of so-called Mongolian races from
the north-west. No historical record has been preserved of these latter,
but they appear to have profoundly affected the population of Bengal,
which is believed to be Mongolo-Dravidian in composition. The Aryans
appear to have been settled to the north of the Hindu Kush, and to have
migrated south-eastwards about 1500 B.C. Their original home has been a
subject of much discussion, but the view now prevalent is that they
arose in southern Russia or Asia Minor, whence a section spread
eastwards and divided into two closely related branches--the Hindus and
Iranians. There were probably two successive Aryan immigrations, and the
tradition of a struggle between them may be preserved in the
_Mahabharata_. The life of the ancient Aryans, as portrayed in their
sacred songs, the _Rig Veda_, was quasi-nomadic and in many ways
democratic, but by the 6th century B.C. settled states had been formed
in the Ganges valley. They were absolute monarchies, but the power of
the king was tempered by the extraordinary influence possessed by the
hereditary sacerdotal class or Brahmans. The position of this class,
which has remained till the present day, is connected with the
institution of caste, a division of the population into groups founded
partly on racial distinctions. The peaceful progress of Brahmanism was
hindered by the doctrine of the Indian prince Gotama, called the Buddha,
which grew into one of the greatest religions of the world. For many
centuries the culture and development of the Hindus depended mainly on
the interaction of the old Brahmanical religion and Buddhism. The latter
was finally absorbed, and disappeared in India itself, but has spread
Indian influence over the whole of eastern Asia, where it still
flourishes.

In 326 B.C. Alexander invaded the Punjab. The immediate result was
small, but the establishment of Perso-Greek kingdoms in central Asia had
a powerful influence on Indian art and culture. It may also have helped
to familiarize the Hindu mind with the idea of an empire, which appeared
among them later than in other Asiatic countries. The first empire,
called Maurya, reached its greatest extent in the time of Asoka (264-227
B.C.), who ruled from Afghanistan to Madras. He was a zealous Buddhist
and gave the first example of a missionary religion, for by his
exertions the faith was spread over all India and Ceylon. No Hindu
empires have lasted long, and the Maurya dominions broke up fifty years
after his death.

In the next period (c. 150 B.C.-A.D. 300) India was invaded from the
north by tribes partly of Parthian and partly of Turki (Yue-chi, &c.)
origin. Owing to the absence of dated records, the chronology of these
invasions has not yet been set beyond dispute, but the most important
was that of the Kushans, whose king Kanishka founded a state which
comprised northern India and Kashmir. They were Buddhists, and it is
probable that the Mahayana or northern form of Buddhism was due to an
amalgamation of Gotama's doctrines with the ideas (largely Greek and
Persian) which they brought with them. Much of Sivaism has probably the
same origin. Another native empire, known as Gupta, rose on the ruins of
the Kushan kingdom, and embraced nearly the whole peninsula, but it
broke up in the 5th century, partly owing to the attacks of new northern
invaders, the Huns. The Malava dynasty maintained Hindu civilization in
the 6th century, and from 606 to 646 Harsha established a brief but
brilliant empire in the north with its capital at Kanauj. This epoch is
marked by the renaissance of Sanskrit literature and the gradual revival
of Hinduism at the expense of Buddhism. But after Harsha Hindu history
is lost in a maze of small and transitory states, incapable of resisting
the ever advancing Mahommedan peril. As early as 712 the Arabs conquered
Sind, and by the end of the 11th century the whole of northern India was
in Moslem hands. Two periods may be distinguished, namely the Turki
(1200-1526) and the Mogul empire. The former comprised several dynasties
of mixed Turki and Iranian race, but was wanting in coherency. In the
neighbourhood of the Moslem capitals, Islam spread rapidly, but in such
districts as Rajputana and specially Vijayanagar (Mysore) Hindu
civilization and religion maintained themselves.

In 1526 the Moguls descended on India from Transoxiana and seized the
throne of Delhi. They never subjugated the south, but the empire which
they founded in the north was for about two centuries, under such rulers
as Akbar and Shah Jehan, one of the most brilliant which Asia has seen.
After 1707 it began to decline: the governors became independent: a
powerful Mahratta confederacy arose in central India; Nadir Shah of
Persia sacked Delhi; and Ahmed Shah made repeated invasions. A still
more formidable danger, the power of the French and English, continued
to increase. Amidst such confusion the authority of the Mogul empire
rapidly disappeared, but it lasted as a name till the Mutiny (1857).

Indian history until Mahommedan times is marked by the unusual
prominence of religious ideas, and is a record of intellectual
development rather than of political events. Whatever national unity the
Hindu peoples possessed came from the persistent and penetrating
influence of the Brahman caste. Kings held a secondary position, and
were generally regarded as adventitious tyrants, rather than as the
heads and representatives of the nation. Even the great dynasties have
left few traces, and it is with difficulty that the patient historian
disinters the minor kingdoms from obscurity, but Indian religion,
literature and art have influenced all Asia from Persia to Japan.

10._Persia._-- The Persians, with whom are often coupled the Medes,
appear to be pure Aryans in origin, and the earliest form of their
language and religion offers remarkable analogies to the Vedas. It is
reasonable to suppose that their ancestors and those of the Hindus at
one time formed a single tribe somewhere in central Asia. The religion
was remodelled by Zoroaster, who seems to be a historical character and
to have lived about the 7th century B.C. About the same time they shook
off the domination of Assyria. From the 6th century onwards their
empire, then known as Median, began to expand at the expense of the
surrounding states. They destroyed Nineveh in alliance with the
Babylonians, and half a century later Cyrus took Babylon and founded the
great dynasty of the Achaemenidae. The substitution of the Persian for
the Median power, which took place with the advent of Cyrus, seems to
indicate merely the pre-eminence of a particular tribe and not conquest
by another race. The power of the Achaemenidae, when at its maximum,
extended from the Oxus and Indus in the east to Thrace in the west and
Egypt in the south, but fell before Greece, after lasting for rather
more than 200 years. Darius and Xerxes were repulsed in their efforts to
subjugate the Greek Peninsula, and Alexander the Great conquered their
successor Darius III. in 329. But the greater part of the empire
continued to exist under new masters, the Seleucids, as a Hellenistic
power which was of great importance for the dissemination of Greek
culture in the East. Bactria soon became independent under an Indo-Greek
dynasty, and the blending of Greek, Persian, central Asiatic and Hindu
influences had an important effect on the art and religion of India, and
through India on all eastern Asia. About the same period (250 B.C.-A.D.
227) the Parthian empire arose under the Arsacids in Khorasan and the
adjacent districts. The Parthians appear to have been a Turanian tribe
who had adopted many Persian customs. They successfully withstood the
Romans, and at one time their power extended from India to Syria. They
succumbed to the Persian dynasty of the Sassanids, who ruled
successfully for about four centuries, established the Zoroastrian faith
as their state religion, and maintained a creditable conflict with the
East Roman empire. But in the 7th century they were defeated by
Heraclius, and shortly afterwards were annihilated before the first
impetus of the Mahommedan conquest, which established Islam in Persia
and the neighbouring lands, sweeping away old civilizations and
boundaries. During the greater part of the Mahommedan period Persia has
been ruled by troubled and short-lived dynasties. It attained a certain
dignity and unity under Abbas Shah (1585-1628), but in later times was
distracted and disorganized by Afghan invasions. The present dynasty,
which is of Turkoman origin, dates from 1789.

The achievements of the Persians in art, literature and religion are by
no means contemptible, but somewhat mixed and cosmopolitan. Owing to its
position, the Persian state, when it from time to time became a
conquering empire, overlapped Asia Minor, Babylon and India, and hence
acted as an intermediary for transmitting art and ideas, sending for
instance Greek sculpture to India and the cult of Mithra to western
Europe. It is perhaps on account of this intermediate flavour that the
literature of Persia--for instance the adaptations of Omar Khayyam--is
more appreciated in Europe than that of other Oriental nations. On the
other hand, the wars between Persia and Greece were recognized both at
the time and afterwards as a struggle between Europe and Asia; the fact
that both combatants were Aryans was not felt, and has no importance
compared to the difference of continent.

11. _Jews._--The Israelites appear to have been originally a nomadic
tribe akin to the Arabs, whom they resemble in their want of political
instinct and in their extraordinary religious genius. Among many
remarkable qualities they have been distinguished from the earliest
times by a species of commensalism, or power of living among other
nations without becoming either socially merged or politically distinct.
Their traditional history represents them as migrating to the borders of
Egypt and living there for some centuries. After the exodus, which
perhaps took place about 1300 B.C., they moved northwards again and
founded a state of modest dimensions, which attained a short-lived unity
under Solomon, but succumbed to internal dissensions and to the attacks
of Assyria and Babylon. Shalmanezer destroyed the northern kingdom or
Israel in 720, and following the practice of the times deported the
majority of the population, whose traces became lost to history. There
is no reason why their descendants should not be found to-day in various
tribes, but the physical type commonly called Jewish is characteristic
not so much of Israel as of western Asia generally. In 588
Nebuchadnezzar carried off the Jews in captivity, but after the Persian
conquest of Babylonia they were allowed to return to Palestine in 538.
Their institutions and ideas were probably considerably modified during
this period. Babylon long continued to be a Jewish centre whence the
Jews radiated to other countries. The restored state of Jerusalem lived
for about six centuries in partial independence under Persian, Egyptian,
Syrian and Roman rule, often showing an aggressively heroic attachment
to its national customs, which brought it into collision with its
suzerains, until the temple was destroyed by Titus in A.D. 70, and the
country laid waste in the succeeding years. But long before this period
the Jews of the Dispersion had become as important as the inhabitants of
Palestine. From choice or compulsion large numbers settled in Egypt in
the time of the Ptolemies, and added an appreciable element to
Alexandrine culture, while gradual voluntary emigration established
Jewish communities in Syria, Asia Minor, Greece and Italy, who
facilitated the first spread of Christianity. In spite of chronic
unpopularity and recurring persecutions they have spread over nearly all
Europe. At the end of the 13th century they were expelled from Spain and
many of the exiles moved eastwards. At present the largest numbers are
to be found in the eastern parts of Europe. It is remarkable that though
the Jews live in relative peace with Asiatics, the great majority of
them prefer Europe as a residence.

12. _Arabs._--The Arabs have hardly any history before the rise of
Islam, although their name is mentioned by surrounding nations from the
9th century B.C. onwards. They appear to have had few states or kings,
but rather tribes and chiefs. Their relationship to the Babylonians and
Jews is indicated by linguistic and ethnological data. The language and
writing of the Semites who, at an unknown period, settled in what is now
Abyssinia, show affinities with those of South Arabia, and these Semites
may have been immigrants into Africa from that region. It is plain from
early Moslem literature that Persian, Christian and especially Jewish
ideas had penetrated into Arabia.

With the rise of Mahommedanism occurred a sudden effervescence of the
Arabs, who during some centuries threatened to impose not only their
political authority but their civilization and new religion on the whole
known world. They successfully invaded India and central Asia in the
east, Spain and Morocco in the west. The Caliphate under the Omayyads of
Damascus, and then the Abbasids of Bagdad, became the principal power in
the nearer East. It had not, however, a sufficiently coherent
organization for permanence; parts of it became independent, others
were first protected and then absorbed by the Turks. The Arab rule in
Spain, which once threatened to overwhelm Europe and was turned back
near Tours by Charles Martel, was distinguished by its tolerance and
civilization, and lingered on till the 15th century.

The collapse of the political power of the Arabs was singularly
complete. The Caliphate, though Arabian, was always geographically
outside Arabia, and on its fall Arabia remained as it was before Islam,
isolated and inaccessible. It is still one of the least known parts of
the globe, and has hardly any political link with the outside, for the
Arabs of northern Africa form separate states. But in spite of this
total political collapse, Arabic religion and literature are still one
of the greatest forces working in the western half of Asia, in northern
Africa and to some extent in eastern Europe.

13. _Ceylon_, though geographically an annex of India, has not followed
its fortunes historically. According to tradition it was invaded by an
Aryan-speaking colony from the valley of the Ganges in the 6th century
B.C. It received Buddhism from north India in the time of Asoka, and has
had considerable importance as a centre of religious culture which has
influenced Burma and Siam. Its medieval history consists of struggles
between the native sovereigns and Tamil invaders. A powerful native
dynasty reigned in the 12th century, but in 1408 the island was attacked
by Chinese, and from 1505 onwards it was distracted by the attacks and
squabbles of Europeans. It was partially subjugated, first by the
Portuguese and then by the Dutch. In 1796 the Dutch were expelled by the
English.

14. _Indo-China._--This is an appropriate name for Burma, Siam,
Cambodia, Annam, &c., for both in position and in civilization they lie
between India and China. Indian influence is predominant as far as
Cambodia (though with a Chinese tinge), Indian alphabets being employed
and the Buddhism being of the Sinhalese type, but in Annam and Tongking
the Chinese script and many Chinese institutions are in use. The
population belongs to various races, and also comprises little-known
wild tribes, (i.) Languages of the group known as Mon-Annam are spoken
in Annam and in Pegu, an ancient kingdom originally distinct from Burma
though now confounded with it. This distribution seems to indicate that
they once spread over the whole region, and were divided by the later
advance of the Siamese and others. Until Annam was taken by the French,
its history consisted of a struggle with the Chinese, who alternately
asserted and lost their sovereignty. The Annamese are, however, a
distinct race. Cochin China was once the seat of a kingdom called
Champa, which appears to have had a hinduized Malay civilization and to
have been subsequently absorbed by Annam. (ii.) The Burmese are
linguistically allied to the Tibetans, and probably entered Burma from
the north-west. The early history consists largely of conflicts between
the Burmese and Talaings. The kingdom which was annexed by Britain in
1885 was founded about 1750 by Alompra, who united his countrymen and
broke the power of the Talaings. He also invaded Siam. (iii.) The Khmers
or Cambodians, whose languages appear to belong to the Mon-Annam group,
form a relatively ancient kingdom, much reduced in the last few
centuries by the advance of the Siamese and new a French protectorate.
Remarkable ruins dating from perhaps A.D. 800 to 1000 attest the former
prevalence of strong Hindu influence, (iv.) The Siamese or Thai, who
speak a monosyllabic language of the Chinese type, but written in an
Indian alphabet, represent a late invasion from southern China, whence
they descended about the 13th century.

15. _Malays._--This widely-scattered race has no political union and its
distribution is a puzzle for ethnography. At present it occupies the
extremity of the Malay Peninsula, Java, Sumatra, Borneo, the Philippines
and other islands of the Malay Archipelago as well as Madagascar, while
the inhabitants of most islands in the South Seas, including New Zealand
and Hawaii, speak languages which if not Malay have at least undergone a
strong Malay influence. It would seem from this distribution that the
Malays are not continental, but a seafaring race with exceptional powers
of dispersal, who have spread over the ocean from some island
centre--perhaps Java. The latest theory, however, is that there is a
great linguistic group (which may or may not prove to correspond to an
ethnic unity) comprising the Munda, Monkhmer, Malay, Polynesian and
Micronesian languages, and that the stream of immigration which
distributed them started from the extreme west. Three periods can be
traced in the history of the Asiatic Malays. In the first (in which such
tribes as the Dyaks have remained) they were semi-barbarous. In the
second, Hindu civilization reached the Malay Peninsula, Java, Sumatra
and other islands. The presence of Hindu ruins, as well as of numerous
Indian words and customs, testifies to the strength of this influence.
It was, however, superseded by Islam, which spread to the Malay
Archipelago and Peninsula before the 16th century. At the present time
the Arabic alphabet is used on the mainland, but Indian alphabets in
Java, Sumatra, &c.

16. _Tibet._--This remote and mountainous country has a peculiar
civilization. It has entirely escaped Islam, and though it is a nominal
vassal of China, direct Chinese influence has not been strong. The most
striking feature is the religion, a corrupt form of late Indian
Buddhism, known as Lamaism, which, largely in consequence of the favour
shown by Jenghiz Khan and his successors, has attained temporal power
and developed into an ecclesiastical state curiously like the papacy.

17. _Mongols._--Such civilization as the Mongols possess is a mixture of
Chinese and Indian, the latter derived chiefly through Tibet, but their
alphabet is a curious instance of transplantation. It is an adaptation
of the Syriac writing introduced by the early Nestorian missionaries.

  Literature, art, science.

18. Almost all Asiatic countries have a literature, but it is often not
indigenous and consists of foreign works, chiefly religious, read either
in translations or the original. Thus with the exception of a little
folklore the literature of Indo-China, Tibet, Mongolia, Korea and
Manchuria is mainly Indian or Chinese. The chief original literatures
are Chinese, Sanskrit, Pali, Arabic and Persian. The Japanese have
produced few books of importance, and their compositions are chiefly
remarkable as being lighter and more secular than is usual in Asia, but
the older Chinese works take high rank both for their merits and the
effect they have had. The extensive Sanskrit literature, which has
reached in translations China, Japan and Java, is chiefly theological
and poetical, history being conspicuously absent. India has also a
considerable medieval and modern literature in various languages. Pali,
though only a form of Hindu literature, has a separate history, for it
died in India and was preserved in Ceylon, whence it was imported to
Burma and Siam as the language of religion. The Pali versions of
Buddha's discourses are among the most remarkable products of Asia. The
literatures of all Moslem peoples are largely inspired by Arabic, which
has produced a voluminous collection of works in prose and poetry.
Persian, after being itself transformed by Arabic, has in its turn
largely influenced all west Asiatic Moslem literature from Hindustani to
Turkish.

If one excepts the Old Testament, which is a product of the extreme west
of Asia, it is remarkable how small has been the influence of Asiatic
literature on Europe. Though Greek and Slavonic almost ceased to be
written languages under Turkish rule, Europeans showed no disposition to
replace them by Ottoman or Arabic literature.

Without counting subdivisions there would seem to be three main schools
of art in Asia at present--Chinese, Indian and Moslem. The first
contains many original elements. It is feeblest in architecture and
strongest in the branches demanding skill and care in a limited compass,
such as painting, porcelain and enamel. It is the main inspiration of
Japanese art, which, however, shows great originality in its treatment
of borrowed themes. Both China and Japan have felt through Buddhism the
influence of Indian art, which contains at least two elements--one
indigenous and the other Greco-Persian. Unlike Chinese art it has a
genius for architecture and sculpture rather than painting. Mahommedan
art is also largely architectural and has affected nearly all Moslem
countries. Except that the use of Arabic inscriptions is one of its
principal methods of decoration, it owes little to Arabia and much to
Byzantium. The Persian variety of this art is more ornate, and less
averse to representations of living beings. Both Moslem and Chinese art
are closely connected with calligraphy, but Hindus rarely use writing
for ornament.

In both art and literature modern Asia is inferior to the past more
conspicuously than Europe.

As for science, astronomy was cultivated by the Babylonians at an early
period, and it is probably from them that a knowledge of the heavenly
bodies and their movements spread over Asia. Grammar and prosody were
studied in India with a marvellous accuracy and minuteness several
centuries before Christ. Mathematics were cultivated by the Chinese,
Indians and Arabs, but nearly all the sciences based on the observation
of nature, including medicine, have remained in a very backward
condition. Much the same, however, might have been said of Europe until
two centuries ago, and the scientific knowledge of the Arabs under the
earlier Caliphates was equal or superior to that of any of their
contemporaries. Histories and accounts of travels have been composed
both in Arabic and Chinese.

  Influence of Asia on other continents.

19. It is only natural that Europe should have chiefly felt the
influence of western Asia. Though Europeans may be indebted to China for
some mechanical inventions, she was too distant to produce much direct
effect, and the influence of India has been mainly directed towards the
East. The resemblances between primitive Christianity and Buddhism
appear to be coincidences, and though both early Greek philosophy and
later Alexandrine ideas suggest Indian affinities, there is no clear
connexion such as there is between certain aspects of Chinese thought
and India.

Any general statement as to the debt owed by early European
civilizations to western Asia would at present be premature, for though
important discoveries have been made in Crete and Babylonia the best
authorities are chary of positive conclusions as to the relations of
Cretan civilization to Egypt and Babylonia. Egyptian influence within
the Aegean area seems certain, and the theory that Greek writing and
systems for reckoning time are Babylonian in origin has not been
disproved, though the history of the alphabet is more complex than was
supposed.

In historic times Asia has attempted to assert her influence over Europe
by a series of invasions, most of which have been repulsed. Such were
the Persian wars of Greece, and perhaps one may add Hannibal's invasion
of Italy, if the Carthaginians were Phoenicians transplanted to Africa.
The Roman empire kept back the Persians and Parthians, but could not
prevent a series of incursions by Avars, Huns, Bulgarians, and later by
Mongols and Turks. Islam has twice obtained a footing in Europe, under
the Arabs in Spain and under the Turks at Constantinople. The earlier
Asiatic invasions were conducted by armies operating at a distance from
their bases, and had little result, for the soldiery retired after a
time (like Alexander from India), or more rarely (e.g. the Bulgarians)
settled down without keeping up any connexion with Asia. The Turks, and
to some extent the Arabs in Spain, were successful because they first
conquered the parts of Asia and Africa adjoining Europe, so that the
final invaders were in touch with Asiatic settlements. Though the Turks
have profoundly affected the whole of eastern Europe, the result of
their conquests has been not so much to plant Asiatic culture in Europe
as to arrest development entirely, the countries under their rule
remaining in much the same condition as under the moribund Byzantine
empire.

In general, Europe has in historic times shown itself decidedly hostile
to Asiatic institutions and modes of thought. It is only of recent years
that the writings of Schopenhauer and the researches of many
distinguished orientalists have awakened some interest in Asiatic
philosophy.

The influence of Asia on Africa has been considerable, and until the
middle of the 10th century greater than that of Europe. Some authorities
hold that Egyptian civilization came from Babylonia, and that the
so-called Hamitic languages are older and less specialized members of
the Semitic family. The connexion between Carthage and Phoenicia is more
certain, and the ancient Abyssinian kingdom was founded by Semites from
south Arabia. The traditions of the Somalis derive them from the same
region. The theory that the ruins in Mashonaland were built by
immigrants from south Arabia is now discredited, but there was certainly
a continuous stream of Arab migration to East Africa which probably
began in pre-Moslem times and founded a series of cities on the coast.
The whole of the north of Africa from Egypt to Morocco has been
mahommedanized, and Mahommedan influence is general and fairly strong
from Timbuktu to Lake Chad and Wadai. South of the equator, Arab
slave-dealers penetrated from Zanzibar to the great lakes and the Congo
during the second and third quarters of the 19th century, but their
power, though formidable, has disappeared without leaving any permanent
traces.

The relation to Asia of the pre-European civilizations of America is
another of those questions which admit of no definite answer at present,
though many facts support the theory that the semi-civilized inhabitants
of Mexico and Central America crossed from Asia by Bering Straits and
descended the west coast. Some authorities hold that Peruvian
civilization had no connexion with the north and was an entirely
indigenous product, but Kechua is in structure not unlike the
agglutinative languages of central and northern Asia.

  Influence of Europe on Asia.

20. European influence on Asia has been specially strong at two epochs,
firstly after the conquests of Alexander the Great, and secondly from
the 16th century onwards. Alexander's conquests resulted in the
foundation of Perso-Greek kingdoms in Asia, which not only hellenized
their own area but influenced the art and religion of India and to some
extent of China. Then follows a long period in which eastern Europe was
mainly occupied in combating Asiatic invasions, and had little
opportunity of Europeanizing the East. Somewhat later the Crusades kept
up communication with the Levant, and established there the power of the
Roman Church, somewhat to the detriment of oriental Christianity, but
intercourse with farther Asia was limited to the voyages of a few
travellers. Looking at eastern Europe and western Asia only, one must
say that Asiatic influences have on the whole prevailed hitherto (though
perhaps the tide is turning), for Islam is paramount in this region and
European culture at a low ebb. But the case is quite different if one
looks at the two continents as a whole, for improvement in means of
communication has brought about strange vicissitudes, and western Europe
has asserted her power in middle and eastern Asia.

In the 16th century a new era began with the discovery by the Portuguese
of the route to India round the Cape, and the naval powers of Europe
started one after another on careers of oriental conquest. The movement
was maritime and affected the nations in the extreme west of Europe
rather than those nearer Asia, who were under the Turkish yoke. Also the
parts of Asia affected were chiefly India and the extreme East. The
countries west of India, being less exposed to naval invasion, remained
comparatively untouched. It will thus be seen that European (excluding
Russian) power in Asia is based almost entirely on improved navigation.
There was no attempt to overwhelm whole empires by pouring into them
masses of troops, but commerce was combined with territorial
acquisition, and a continuity of European interest secured by the
presence of merchants and settlers. The course of oriental conquest
followed the events of European politics, and the possessions of
European powers in the East generally changed hands according to the
fortunes of their masters at home. Portugal was first on the scene, and
in the 16th century established a considerable littoral empire on the
coasts of East Africa, India and China, fragments of which still remain,
especially Goa, where Portuguese influence on the natives was
considerable. Before the century was out the Dutch appeared as the
successful rivals of the Portuguese, but the real struggle for supremacy
in southern Asia took place between France and England about 1740-1783.
Both entered India as commercial companies, but the disorganized
condition of the Mogul empire necessitated the use of military force to
protect their interests, and allured them to conquest. The companies
gradually undertook the financial control of the districts where they
traded and were recognized by the natives as political powers. The
ultimate victory of England seems due less to any particular aptitude
for dealing with oriental problems than to a better command of the seas
and to considerations of European politics. At the end of the Napoleonic
wars Portugal had Macao and Goa, Holland Java, Sumatra and other
islands, France some odds and ends in India, while England emerged with
Hong Kong, Singapore, Ceylon and a free hand in India. Guided by such
administrators as Warren Hastings, the East India Company had assumed
more and more definitely the functions of government for a great part of
India. In 1809 its exclusive trading rights were taken away by
Parliament, but its administrative status was thus made clearer, and
when after the mutiny of 1857 it was desirable to define British
authority in India there seemed nothing unnatural in declaring it to be
a possession of the crown.

Another category of European possessions in Asia comprises those
acquired towards the end of the 19th century, such as Indo-China
(France), Burma and Wei-Hai-Wei (Britain), and Kiao-Chow (Germany).
Whereas the earlier conquests were mostly the results of large
half-conscious national movements working out their destinies in the
East, these later ones were annexations deliberately planned by European
cabinets. It seemed to be assumed that Asia was to be divided among the
powers of Europe, and each was anxious to get its share or more.

The advance of Russia in Asia is entirely different from that of the
other powers, since it has taken place by land and not by sea. Though
the geographical extent of Russian territory and influence is enormous,
she has always moved along the line of least resistance. She is a
moderately strong empire lying to the north of the great Moslem states,
and having for neighbours a series of very weak principalities or
semi-civilized tribes. The conquest of Siberia and central Asia
presented no real difficulties: Persia and Constantinople were left on
one side, and Russia was defeated as soon as she was opposed by a
vigorous power in the Far East. As the Russian possessions in Asia are
continuous with European Russia, it is only natural that they should
have been russified far more thoroughly than the British possessions
have been anglicized.

There has been great difference of opinion as to the extent to which
Alexander's conquests influenced Asia, and it is equally hard to say
what is the effect now being produced by Europe. Clearly such
alterations as the construction of railways in nearly all parts of the
continent, and the establishment of peace over formerly disturbed areas
like India, are of enormous importance, and must change the life of the
people. But the mental constitution of Asiatics is less easily modified
than their institutions, and even Japan has assimilated European methods
rather than European ideas. (C. El.)

  AUTHORITIES.--The modern bibliography of Asia, including the works of
  travellers and explorers since 1880, is voluminous. It is impossible
  to refer to all that has been written in the Survey Reports and
  Gazetteers of the government of India, or in the records of the Royal
  Asiatic Society, or the Asiatic Society, Bengal; but amongst the more
  important popular works are the following:--Richthofen, "China, Japan,
  and Korea," vol. iv. _Jour. R.G.S._, _China_ (Berlin, 1877); Regel,
  "Upper Oxus," vol. i. _Proc. R.G.S._, 1879; Dr Bellew, _Afghanistan
  and the Afghans_ (London, 1879); Nicolas Prjevalski, "Explorations in
  Asia," see vols. i., ii., v., ix. and xi. of the _Proc. R.G.S._,
  1879-1889; W. Blunt, "A Visit to Jebel Shammar," vol ii. _Proc.
  R.G.S._, 1880; Captain W Gill, _The River of Golden Sand_ (London,
  1880); Sir R. Temple, "Central Plateau of Asia," vol. iv. _Proc.
  R.G.S._ 1882; Baker, "A Journey of Exploration in Western Ssu-Chuan,"
  vol. i. _Supplementary Papers R.G.S._, 1882-1885; Sir C. Wilson,
  "Notes on Physical and Historical Geography of Asia Minor," vol. vi.
  _Proc. R.G.S._, 1884; General J.T. Walker, "Asiatic Explorers of the
  Indian Survey," vol. viii. _Proc. R.G.S._, 1885; Samuel Beal,
  _Buddhist Records of the Western World_ (Boston, 1885); Charles
  Doughty, _Travels in Northern Arabia_ (Cambridge, 1886); _Travels in
  Arabia Deserta_ (Cambridge, 1888); Venukoff, "Explorations," vol.
  viii. _Proc. G.R.S._, 1886; Ney Elias, "Explorations in Central Asia,"
  see vols. viii. and ix. _Proc. R.G.S._, 1886-1887; Arthur Carey,
  "Explorations in Turkestan," see vol. ix. _Proc. R.G.S._, 1887; Henry
  Lansdell, _Through Central Asia_ (London, 1887); Archibald Colquhoun,
  _Report on Railway Connexion between Burma and China_ (London, 1887);
  Major C. Yate, _Northern Afghanistan_ (Edinburgh, 1888); Captain F.
  Younghusband, _The Heart of a Continent_ (London, 1893); _A Journey
  through Manchuria, &c._ (Lahore, 1888); also see vol. x. _Proc.
  R.G.S._, and vol. v. _Jour. R.G.S._; Dutreuil de Rhins, _L'Asie
  Centrale_ (Paris, 1889); Pierre Bonvalot, _Through the Heart of Asia_,
  trans. Pitman (London, 1889); _From Paris to Tonkin_, trans. Pitman
  (London, 1891); Roborovski, translation from Russian _Invalide_,
  October 1889, vol. xii. _Proc. R.G.S._; "Central Asia," vol. viii.
  _Jour. R.G.S._, 1896; Colonel Mark Bell, "Trade Routes of Asia," vol.
  xii. _Proc. R.G.S._, 1890; W.W. Rockhill, "An American in Tibet,"
  _Century Magazine_, November 1890; _The Land of the Lamas_ (London,
  1891); Theodore Bent, "Hadramut," vol. iv. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1894;
  "Southern Arabia," vol. vi. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1896; "Bahrein Islands,"
  vol. xii. _Proc. R.G.S._, 1890; Grombcherski, "Explorations in Kuen
  Lun," vol. xii. _Proc. R.G.S._, 1890; Lydekker, "The Geology of the
  Kashmir Valley and Chamba Territories," vols. xiii. and xiv.
  _Geological Survey of India_; Max Müller, _The Sacred Books of the
  East_ (Oxford, 1890-1894); Elisée Reclus, _The Earth and its
  Inhabitants_ (series, 1890); G.W. Leitner, _Dardistan_; H.F. Blanford,
  _Elementary Geography of India, Burma, and Ceylon_ (London, 1890);
  _Guide to the Climate and Weather of India_ (London, 1889); Lord
  Dunmore, _The Pamirs_ (London, 1892); A. Tissandier, _Voyage au tour
  du monde_ (Paris, 1892); Lord Curzon, _Persia and the Persian
  Question_ (London, 1892); _Russia and the Anglo-Russian Question_
  (London, 1889); _Problems of the Far East_ (London, 1894); Captain
  Hamilton Bower, _Diary of a Journey across Tibet_ (Calcutta, 1893);
  Szechenyi, _Die wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse der Reise des Grafen
  Béla Szechenyi in Ostasien_ (Wien, 1893); R.D. Oldham, "Evolution of
  Indian Geology," vol. iii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1894; Baron Toll,
  "Siberia," vol. iii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1894; Delmar Morgan, "The
  Mountain Systems of Central Asia," _Scottish Geological Magazine_, No.
  10, of 1894; Sir Frederick Goldsmid, "Persian Geography," vol. vi.
  _Jour. R.G.S._, 1895; Warrington Smyth, "Siam," vol. vi. _Jour.
  R.G.S._, 1895; "Siamese East Coast," vol xi. _Jour._ 1898; Prince
  Kropotkin, "Siberian Railway," vol. v. _R.G.S. Jour._, 1895; W.R.
  Lawrence, _The Vale of Kashmir_ (Oxford, 1895); Captain Vaughan,
  "Persia," vol. viii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1896; Prince H. d'Orleans, "Yunan
  to India," vol. vii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1896; "Tonkin to Talifu," vol.
  viii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1896; Sir T. Holdich, "Ancient and Medieval
  Makran," vol. vii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1896; _The Indian Borderland_
  (London, 1901); India (Oxford, 1904); Colonel Woodthorpe, "Shan
  States," vol. vii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1896; _Report of the Pamir Boundary
  Commission_ (Calcutta, 1896); St George Littledale, "Journey Across
  the Pamirs from North to South," vol. iii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1894, and
  vol. vii. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1896; Sir G. Robertson, _The Kafirs of the
  Hindu Kush_ (London, 1896); Captain Stiffe, "Persian Gulf Trading
  Centres," vols. viii., ix. and x. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1897; Ney Elias and
  Ross, _A History of the Moghuls of Central Asia, from the
  Tarskh-i-Rastisdi of Mirza Haidar_ (London, 1898); Grenard, _Mission
  scientifique sur la Haute Asie_ (Paris, 1898); Dr Sven Hedin, _Through
  Asia_ (London, 1898); Central Asia and Tibet (1903); _Geographie des
  Hochlandes van Pamir_ (Berlin, 1894); Captain M.S. Wellby, "Through
  Tibet," _R.G.S. Jour._, September 1898; Captain P.M. Sykes, "Persian
  Explorations," vol. x. _Jour. R.G.S._, 1898; _Ten Thousand Miles in
  Persia_ (1902); Kronshin, "Old Beds of the Oxus," _Jour. R.G.S._,
  September 1898; Sir W. Hunter, _History of British India_, vol. i.
  (London, 1898); Captain H. Deasy, "Western Tibet," vol. ix. _Jour.
  R.G.S._; In Tibet and Chinese Turkestan (London, 1901); A. Little,
  _The Far East_ (Oxford, 1905); Captain Rawling, _The Great Plateau_
  (London, 1905); _Journal of the Royal Geogl. Society_, vols. xv. to
  xxv. (1900-1905); Colonel A. Durand, _The Making of a Frontier_
  (London, 1899); R. Cobbold, _Innermost Asia_ (London, 1900).
       (T. H. H.*)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] Authorities differ in their methods and results of computation of
    these and other similar measurements.