ASMA'I [Abu Sa'id 'Abd ul-Malik ibn Quraib] (c. 739-831), Arabian
scholar, was born of pure Arab stock in Basra and was a pupil there of
Abu 'Amr ibn ul-'Ala. He seems to have been a poor man until by the
influence of the governor of Basra he was brought to the notice of Harun
al-Rashid, who enjoyed his conversation at court and made him tutor of
his son. He became wealthy and acquired property in Basra, where he
again settled for a time; but returned later to Bagdad, where he died in
831. Asma'i was one of the greatest scholars of his age. From his youth
he stored up in his memory the sacred words of the Koran, the traditions
of the Prophet, the verses of the old poets and the stories of the
ancient wars of the Arabs. He was also a student of language and a
critic. It was as a critic that he was the great rival of Abu 'Ubaida
(q.v.). While the latter followed (or led) the Shu'ubite movement and
declared for the excellence of all things not Arabian, Asma'i was the
pious Moslem and avowed supporter of the superiority of the Arabs over
all peoples, and of the freedom of their language and literature from
all foreign influence. Some of his scholars attained high rank as
literary men. Of Asma'i's many works mentioned in the catalogue known as
the _Fihrist_, only about half a dozen are extant. Of these the _Book of
Distinction_ has been edited by D.H. Müller (Vienna, 1876); the _Book of
the Wild Animals_ by R. Geyer (Vienna, 1887); the _Book of the Horse_,
by A. Haffner (Vienna, 1895); the _Book of the Sheep_, by A. Haffner
(Vienna, 1896).

  For life of Asma'i, see Ibn Khallikan, _Biographical Dictionary_,
  translated from the Arabic by McG. de Slane (Paris and London, 1842),
  vol. ii. pp. 123-127. For his work as a grammarian, G. Flügel, _Die
  grammatischen Schulen der Araber_ (Leipzig, 1862), pp. 72-80.
       (G. W. T.)