ASP (_Vipera aspis_), a species of venomous snake, closely allied to the
common adder of Great Britain, which it represents throughout the
southern parts of Europe, being specially abundant in the region of the
Alps. It differs from the adder in having the head entirely covered with
scales, shields being absent, and in having the snout somewhat turned
up. The term "Asp" [Greek: aspis] seems to have been employed by Greek
and Roman writers, and by writers generally down to comparatively recent
times, to designate more than one species of serpent; thus the asp, by
means of which Cleopatra is said to have ended her life, and so avoided
the disgrace of entering Rome a captive, is now generally supposed to
have been the cerastes, or horned viper (_Cerastes cornutus_), of
northern Africa and Arabia, a snake about 15 in. long, exceedingly
venomous, and provided with curious horn-like protuberances over each
eye, which give it a decidedly sinister appearance. The snake, however,
to which the word "asp" has been most commonly applied is undoubtedly
the haje of Egypt, the _spy-slange_ or spitting snake of the Boers
(_Naja haje_), one of the very poisonous _Elarinae_, from 3 to 4 ft.
long, with the skin of its neck loose, so as to render it dilatable at
the will of the animal, as in the cobra of India, a species from which
it differs only in the absence of the spectacle-like mark on the back of
the neck. Like the cobra, also, the haje has its fangs extracted by the
jugglers of the country, who afterwards train it to perform various
tricks. The asp (_Pethen_, [Hebrew: pethen]) is mentioned in various
parts of the Old Testament. This name is twice translated "adder," but
as nothing is told of it beyond its poisonous character and the
intractability of its disposition, it is impossible accurately to
determine the species.