ASPARAGINE, C4H3N2O3, a naturally occurring base, found in plants
belonging to the natural orders Leguminosae and Cruciferae. It occurs
in two optically active forms, namely, as laevo-asparagine and
dextro-asparagine. Laevo-asparagine was isolated in 1805 by L.N.
Vauquelin. A. Piutti (_Gazz. chim. Ital._, 1887, 17, p. 126; 1888, 18,
p. 457) synthesized the asparagines from the monomethyl ester of
inactive aspartic acid by heating it with alcoholic ammonia. In this way
a mixture of the two asparagines was obtained, which were separated by
picking out the hemihedral crystals.

  HOOC·CH·NH2CH2·COOC2H5 + NH3 = C2H5OH + HOOC·CH·NH2·CH2·CONH2.

Laevo-asparagine is slightly soluble in cold water and readily soluble
in hot water. It crystallizes in prisms, containing one molecule of
water of crystallization, the anhydrous form melting at 234-235° C.
Nitrous acid converts it into malic acid, HOOC·CHOH·CH2·COOH. It is
laevo-rotatory in aqueous or in alkaline solution, and dextro-rotatory
in acid solution (L. Pasteur, _Ann. Chim. Phys._, 1851 [2], 31, p. 67).
Dextro-asparagine was first found in 1886 in the shoots of the vetch
(Piutti). It forms rhombic crystals possessing a sweet taste. It is
dextro-rotatory in aqueous or alkaline solution, and laevo-rotatory in
acid solution.

Hydrolysis by means of acids or alkalis converts the asparagines into
aspartic acid; whilst on heating with water in a sealed tube they are
converted into ammonium aspartate. The constitution of the asparagines
has been determined by A. Piutti (_Gazz. chim. Ital._, 1888, 18, p.
457).