ASPASIA, an Athenian courtesan of the 5th century B.C., was born either
at Miletus or at Megara, and settled in Athens, where her beauty and her
accomplishments gained for her a great reputation. Pericles, who had
divorced his wife (445), made her his mistress, and, after the death of
his two legitimate sons, procured the passing of a law under which his
son by her was recognized as legitimate. It was the fashion, especially
among the comic poets, to regard her as the adviser of Pericles in all
his political actions, and she is even charged with having caused the
Samian and Peloponnesian wars (Aristoph. _Acharn_. 497). Shortly before
the latter war, she was accused of impiety, and nothing but the tears
and entreaties of Pericles procured her acquittal. On the death of
Pericles she is said to have become the mistress of one Lysicles, whom,
though of ignoble birth, she raised to a high position in the state;
but, as Lysicles died a year after Pericles (428), the story is
unconvincing. She was the chief figure in the dialogue _Aspasia_ by
Aeschines the Socratic, in which she was represented as criticizing the
manners and training of the women of her time (for an attempted
reconstruction of the dialogue see P. Natorp in _Philologus_, li. p.
489, 1892); in the _Menexenus_ (generally ascribed to Plato) she is a
teacher of rhetoric, the instructress of Socrates and Pericles, and a
funeral oration in honour of those Athenians who had given their lives
for their country (the authorship of which is attributed to Aspasia) is
repeated by Socrates; Xenophon (_Oecon._ lii. 14) also speaks of her in
favourable terms, but she is not mentioned by Thucydides. In opposition
to this view, Wilamowitz-Möllendorff (_Hermes_, xxxv. 1900) regards her
simply as a courtesan, whose personality would readily become the
subject of rumour, favourable or unfavourable. There is a bust bearing
her name in the Pio Clementino Museum in the Vatican.

  See Le Conte de Bièvre, _Les Deux Aspasies_ (1736); J.B. Capefigue,
  _Aspasie et le siècle de Périclès_ (1862); L. Becq de Fouquières.
  _Aspasie de Milet_ (1872); H. Houssaye, _Aspasie, Cléopâtre, Théodora_
  (1899); R. Hamerling, _Aspasia_ (a romance; Eng. trans. by M.J.
  Safford, New York, 1882); J. Donaldson, _Woman_ (1907). Also PERICLES.