ASPHALT, or ASPHALTUM. The solid or semi-solid kinds of bitumen (q.v.)
were termed [Greek: asphaltos] by the Greeks; and by some ancient
classical writers the name of _pissasphaltum_ ([Greek: pissa], pitch)
was also sometimes employed. The asphalt of the Dead Sea (known as
_Lacus Asphaltites_) received considerable notice from early travellers,
and Diodorus the historian states that the inhabitants of the
surrounding parts were accustomed to collect it for use in Egypt for
embalming. In common with other forms of bitumen, asphalt is very widely
distributed geographically and occurs in greater or less quantity in
rocks of all ages. There is some divergence in the views expressed as to
the precise manner of its production, but it may certainly be said that
the principal asphalt deposits are merely the result of the evaporation
and oxidation of liquid petroleum which has escaped from outcropping
strata. The celebrated Pitch Lake of Trinidad was long regarded as the
largest deposit of asphalt in existence, but it is said to be exceeded
in area, if not in depth also, by one in Venezuela. The Trinidad "Lake"
has an area of 99.3 acres, and is sufficiently firm in places to support
a team of horses. The deposit is worked with picks to a depth of a foot
or two, and the excavations soon become filled up by the plastic
material flowing in from below and hardening. The depth of the deposit
is not accurately known. The surface is not level but is composed of
irregularly tumescent masses of various sizes, each said to be subject
to independent motion, whereby the interior of each rises and flows
centrifugally towards the edges. As the spaces between them are always
filled with water, these masses are prevented from coalescing. The
softer parts of the lake constantly evolve gas, which is stated to
consist largely of carbon dioxide and sulphuretted hydrogen, and the
pitch, which is honeycombed with gas-cavities, continues to exhibit this
action for some time after its removal from the lake. The working of the
deposit is in the hands of the New Trinidad Asphalt Company, who hold
the concession up to the year 1930 on payment to the government of a
minimum royalty of £10,000 a year. A circular line of tramway, supported
on palm-leaves, has been laid on the lake to facilitate the removal of
the asphalt. Very large quantities are exported for paving and other
purposes, the annual shipments amounting to about 130,000 tons from the
lake and about 30,000 tons from other properties. The amount of asphalt
in the lake has been estimated at 158,400 tons for each foot of depth,
and if the average depth be taken at 20 ft. this would give a total of
3,168,000 tons; but in 1908, though 1,885,600 tons had been removed in
the previous thirty-five years, there was but little evidence of
reduction in the quantity. The Venezuelan deposit already referred to is
in the state of Bermudez, and the area of it is reported to be more than
1000 acres. The asphalt of Cuba is a well-known article of commerce, of
which 7252 tons was exported to the United States in 1902. The principal
deposits are near the harbour of Cardenas (70 ft. thick), in the Pinar
del Rio, near Havana (18 ft. thick), at Canas Tomasita (105 ft. thick);
and a specially pure variety near Vuelta.

The comparative composition of Trinidad and Cuba asphalt is given in the
following table:--

  +---------------------+---------+------------+------------+
  |                     | Refined |  Refined   |  Refined   |
  |                     |Trinidad,|Cuba (soft),|Cuba (hard),|
  |                     | Melting |  Melting   | Melting    |
  |                     |  point  |    point   |   point    |
  |                     | 185° F. |   115° F.  |  160° F.   |
  +---------------------+---------+------------+------------+
  | Water.              |   0.17  |    0.13    |    0.11    |
  | Volatile bitumen.   |  51.81  |   64.03    |    8.34    |
  | Sulphur.            |  10.00  |    8.35    |    8.92    |
  | Ash (earthy matter).|  28.30  |   19.51    |   16.60    |
  | Fixed carbon.       |   9.72  |    7.98    |   66.03    |
  |                     +---------+------------+------------+
  |                     | 100.00  |  100.00    |  100.00    |
  +---------------------+---------+------------+------------+

The chemical composition of Trinidad asphalt has been given as:--

  +-------+------+------+------+-------+
  |   C.  |  H.  |  N.  |  O.  |   S.  |
  +-------+------+------+------+-------+
  | 80.32 | 6.30 | 0.50 | 1.40 | 11.48 |
  +-------+------+------+------+-------+

The following is a comparison of Trinidad and Venezuela (Bermudez)
asphalt:--

                                                Refined    Refined
                                               Trinidad.  Bermudez.
  Specific gravity at 60° F.                     1.373      1.071
  Bitumen soluble in carbon bisulphide.         61.507 %    92.22  %
  Mineral matter (ash).                         34.51  "     1.50  "
  Non-bituminous organic matter.                 3.983 "     1.28  "
  Portion of total bitumen soluble in alcohol.   8.24  "    11.66  "
  Portion of total bitumen soluble in ether.    80.01  "    81.63  "
  Loss at 212° F.                                0.65  "     1.37  "
  Loss at 400° F. in ten hours.                  7.98  "    17.80  "
  Loss at 400° on total bitumen.                12.811 "    18.308 "
  Evolution of sulphuretted hydrogen at        410° F.   none at 437° F.
  Softening-point.                             160° F.      "    113° F.
  Flowing-point.                               192° F.      "    150° F.

Asphalt in its purest forms is generally black or blackish brown in
colour, and is frequently brittle at ordinary temperatures. Apart from
its principal use in the manufacture of paving materials, it is largely
employed in building as a "damp-course" and as a water-excluding coating
for concrete floors, as well as in the manufacture of roofing-felt. It
also enters largely into the composition of black varnish. The material
chiefly used in the construction of asphalt roadways is an asphaltic or
bituminous limestone found in the Val de Travers, canton of Neuchâtel;
in the neighbourhood of Seyssel, department of Ain; at Limmer, near the
city of Hanover; and elsewhere. The proportion of bitumen present in
asphalt rock usually ranges from 7 to 20%, but it is found that rock
containing more than 11% cannot be satisfactorily used for street
pavements, and it is accordingly customary to mix the richer and poorer
varieties in fine powder in such respective quantities that the
proportion of bitumen present is from 9 to 10%. The richer rock is
utilized as a source of asphalt "mastic," which is employed for
footpaths, floors, roofs, &c. Excellent foundations for steam-hammers,
dynamos and high-speed engines are made of asphaltic concrete.
     (B. R.)