ASPHODEL (_Asphodelus_), a genus of the lily order (Liliaceae),
containing seven species in the Mediterranean region. The plants are
hardy herbaceous perennials with narrow tufted radical leaves and an
elongated stem bearing a handsome spike of white or yellow flowers.
_Asphodelus albus_ and _A. fistulosus_ have white flowers and grow from
1½ to 2 ft. high; _A. ramosus_ is a larger plant, the large white
flowers of which have a reddish-brown line in the middle of each
segment. Bog-asphodel (_Narthecium ossifragum_), a member of the same
family, is a small herb common in boggy places in Britain, with rigid
narrow radical leaves and a stem bearing a raceme of small golden yellow
flowers.

In Greek legend the asphodel is the most famous of the plants connected
with the dead and the underworld. Homer describes it as covering the
great meadow ([Greek: asphodelos leimon]), the haunt of the dead (_Od._
xi. 539, 573; xxiv. 13). It was planted on graves, and is often
connected with Persephone, who appears crowned with a garland of
asphodels. Its general connexion with death is due no doubt to the
greyish colour of its leaves and its yellowish flowers, which suggest
the gloom of the underworld and the pallor of death. The roots were
eaten by the poorer Greeks; hence such food was thought good enough for
the shades (cf. Hesiod, _Works and Days_, 41; Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ xxi.
17 [68]; Lucian, _De luctu_, 19). The asphodel was also supposed to be a
remedy for poisonous snake-bites and a specific against sorcery; it was
fatal to mice, but preserved pigs from disease. The Libyan nomads made
their huts of asphodel stalks (cf. Herod. iv. 190).

No satisfactory derivation of the word is suggested. The English word
"daffodil" is a perversion of "asphodel," formerly written "affodil."
The d may come from the French _fleur d'affodille_. It is no part of the
word philologically.

  See Pauly-Wissowa, _Realencyclopädie_, s.v.; H.O. Lenz, _Botanik der
  alten Griechen und Römer_ (1859); J. Murr, _Die Pflanzenwelt in der
  griechischen Mythologie_ (1890).