ASSAULT (from Lat. _ad_, to or on, and _saltare_, to leap), in English
law, "an attempt or offer with force or violence to do corporal hurt to
another, as by striking at another with a stick or other weapon, or
without a weapon, though the party misses his aim." Notwithstanding
ancient opinions to the contrary, it is now settled that mere words, be
they ever so provoking, will not constitute an assault. Coupled with the
attempt or threat to inflict corporal injury, there must in all cases be
the means of carrying the threat into effect. A _battery_ is more than a
threat or attempt to injure the person of another; the injury must have
been inflicted, but it makes no difference however small it may be, as
the law does not "draw the line between degrees of violence," but
"totally prohibits the first and lowest stage of it." Every battery
includes an assault. A common assault is a misdemeanour, and is
punishable by imprisonment with or without hard labour to the extent of
one year, and if it occasions bodily harm, with penal servitude for
three years, or imprisonment to the extent of two years, with or without
hard labour. There are various different kinds of assaults which are
provided against by particular enactments of parliament, such as the
Offences against the Person Act 1861, the Prevention of Crimes Act 1871,
&c.; and there are also certain aggravated assaults for which the
punishment is severer than for common assault, as an assault with intent
to murder, with intent to commit a rape, &c. In certain cases an assault
and battery is sometimes justifiable, as in the case where a person in
authority, as a parent or schoolmaster, inflicts moderate punishment
upon a child, or in certain cases of self-defence, or in defence of
one's goods and chattels. An assault may be both a tort and a crime,
giving a civil action for damages to the person injured, as well as
being the subject of a criminal prosecution.

_United States._--The general principles applicable throughout the
United States are the same as in England. Riding a horse threateningly
near a person; or riding a bicycle against another (_Mercer v. Corbin_,
117 Indiana Rep. 450); waking one from sleep to present a milk bill
(_Richmond v. Fiske_, 160 Mass. 34), are assaults. A minor is liable for
damages for an assault (_Hildreth v. Hancock_, 156 Illinois Rep. 618).
In Texas it has been held that an assault with a knife is not
necessarily an aggravated assault (_Warren v. State_, 3 S.W. 240), and
an axe is not necessarily a "deadly weapon" with which to assault
(_Gladney v. State_, 12 S.W. 868), and the State must prove that it
would be likely to produce death or serious bodily injury (_Melton v.
State_, 17 S.W. 257). Neither a pistol nor brass knuckles are
necessarily deadly weapons; the State must show their size or manner of
use in making the assault (_Ballard v. State_, 13 S.W. 674; _Miles v.
State_, 5 S.W. 250). But in 1903 a pistol was held by the Texas Supreme
Court to be a deadly weapon if not used simply as a club (_Lockland v.
State_, 73 S.W. 1054), and the same court held in 1904 that a pistol is
a deadly weapon (_Pace v. State_, 79 S.W. 531), and so the assault was
an aggravated assault. In North Carolina it has been held that an axe is
_ex vi termini_ a "deadly weapon" (_State v. Shields_, 110 N.C. 49).