ASSUR (Auth. Vers. _Asshur_), a Hebrew name, occurring in many passages
of the Old Testament, for the land and dominion of Assyria.[1] The
_country_ of Assyria, which in the Assyro-Babylonian literature is known
as _mat Assur_ (_ki_), "land of Assur," took its name from the ancient
city of _Assur_, situated at the southern extremity of Assyria proper,
whose territory, soon after the first Assyrian settlement, was bounded
on the N. by the Zagros mountain range in what is now Kurdistan and on
the S. by the lower Zab river. The kingdom of Assyria, which was the
outgrowth of the primitive settlement on the site of the city of Assur,
was developed by a probably gradual process of colonization in the rich
vales of the middle Tigris region, a district watered by the Tigris
itself and also by several tributary streams, the chief of which was the
lower Zab.[2]

It seems quite evident that the _city_ of Assur was originally founded
by Semites from Babylonia at quite an early, but as yet undetermined
date. In the prologue to the law-code of the great Babylonian monarch
Khammurabi (c. 2250 B.C.), the cities of Nineveh and Assur are both
mentioned as coming under that king's beneficent influence. Assur is
there called _A-usar_ (_ki_),[3] in which combination the ending _-ki_
("land territory") proves that even at that early period there was a
province of Assur more extensive than the city proper. It is probable
that this non-Semitic form _A-usar_ means "well watered region,"[4] a
most appropriate designation for the river settlements of Assyria. The
problem as to the meaning of the name Assur is rendered all the more
confusing by the fact that the city and land are also called _Assur_ (as
well as _A-usar_), both by the Khammurabi records[5] and generally in
the later Assyrian literature. Furthermore, the god- and country-name
_Assur_ also occurs at a late date in Assyrian literature in the forms
_An-sar, An-sar_ (_ki_), which form[6] was presumably read _Assur_. In
the Creation tablet, the heavens personified collectively were indicated
by this term _An-sar_, "host of heaven," in contradistinction to the
earth = _Ki-sar_, "host of earth." In view of this fact, it seems highly
probable that the late writing _An-sar_ for _Assur_ was a more or less
conscious attempt on the part of the Assyrian scribes to identify the
peculiarly Assyrian deity _Asur_ (see ASSUR, the god, below) with the
Creation deity An-sar. On the other hand, there is an epithet _Asir_ or
Ashir ("overseer") applied to several gods and particularly to the deity
_Asur_, a fact which introduced a third element of confusion into the
discussion of the name _Assur_. It is probable then that there is a
triple popular etymology in the various forms of writing the name
_Assur_; viz. _A-usar_,[7] _An-sar_ and the stem _asaru_, all of which
is quite in harmony with the methods followed by the ancient
Assyro-Babylonian philologists.[8]

  See also A.H. Layard, _Discoveries in the Ruins of Nineveh and
  Babylon_ (1853); G. Smith, _Assyrian Discoveries_ (1875); R.W. Rogers,
  _History of Babylonia and Assyria_, i. 297; ii. 13; ii. 30, 76, 102;
  J.F. M'Curdy, _History, Prophecy and the Monuments_, §§ 74, 171 f.,
  247, 258, 283; 57, 59 f. (on the god).     (J. D. Pr.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The name Assur is not connected with the Asshur of 1 Chron. ii.
    24; ii. 45. Note that it is customary to spell the god-name _Asur_
    and the country-name _Assur_.

  [2] Cf. Rassam, _Asshur and the Land of Nimrod_, 250-251, and many
    other works.

  [3] Robert Harper, _Code of Hammurabi_, pp. 6-7, lines 55-58.

  [4] Thus already Delitzsch, _Wo lag das Paradies?_ p. 252. The
    element _a_ means "water," and in _u-sar_ it is probable that _u_
    also means "water," while _sar_ is "park, district." See Prince,
    _Materials for a Sumerian Lexicon_, s.v. _usar_.

  [5] The name appears as _As-sur_ (_ki_) and _As-su-ur_ (_ki_). See
    King, _Letters and Inscriptions of Hammurabi_, iv. p. 23, obv. 27;
    and Nägel, _Beiträge zur Assyriologie_, iv. p. 404; also _Cun. Texts
    from Bab. Tablets_, vi. pl. 19, line 7.

  [6] Meissner-Rost, _Bauinschrift Sanheribs_, K. 5413a; K. 1306, rev.
    16.

  [7] See on this entire subject, Morris Jastrow, Jr., _Journal Amer.
    Orient. Soc._, xxiv. pp. 282-311; also _Die Religion Bab. u. Assyr._,
    pp. 207 ff.

  [8] On the philological methods of the ancient Babylonian priesthood,
    see Prince, _Materials for a Sumerian Lexicon_, Introduction.