AST, GEORG ANTON FRIEDRICH (1778-1841), German philosopher and
philologist, was born at Gotha. Educated there and at the university of
Jena, he became privat-docent at Jena in 1802. In 1805 he became
professor of classical literature in the university of Landshut, where
he remained till 1826, when it was transferred to Munich. There he lived
till his death on the 31st of October 1841. In recognition of his work
he was made an aulic councillor and a member of the Bavarian Academy of
Sciences. He is known principally for his work during the last
twenty-five years of his life on the dialogues of Plato. His _Platon's
Leben und Schriften_ (1816) was the first of those critical inquiries
into the life and works of Plato which originated in the _Introductions_
of Schleiermacher and the historical scepticism of Niebuhr and Wolf.
Distrusting tradition, he took a few of the finest dialogues as his
standard, and from internal evidence denounced as spurious not only
those which are generally admitted to be so (_Epinomis, Minos, Theages,
Arastae, Clitophon, Hipparchus, Eryxias, Letters and Definitions_), but
also the _Meno, Euthydemus, Charmides, Lysis, Laches, First and Second
Alcibiades, Hippias Major and Minor, Ion, Euthyphro, Apology, Crito_,
and even (against Aristotle's explicit assertion) _The Laws_. The
genuine dialogues he divides into three series:--(1) the earliest,
marked chiefly by the poetical and dramatic element, i.e. _Protagoras,
Phaedrus, Gorgias, Phaedo_; (2) the second, marked by dialectic
subtlety, i.e. _Theaetetus, Sophist, Statesman, Parmenides, Cratylus_;
(3) the third group, combining both qualities harmoniously, i.e. the
_Philebus, Symposium, Republic, Timaeus, Critias_. The work was followed
by a complete edition of Plato's works (11 vols., 1819-1832) with a
Latin translation and commentary. His last work was the _Lexicon
Platonicum_ (3 vols., 1834-1839), which is both valuable and
comprehensive. In his works on aesthetics he combined the views of
Schelling with those of Winckelmann, Lessing, Kant, Herder, Schiller and
others. His histories of philosophy are marked more by critical
scholarship than by originality of thought, though they are interesting
as asserting the now familiar principle that the history of philosophy
is not the history of opinions, but of reason as a whole; he was among
the first to attempt to formulate a principle of the development of
thought. Beside his works on Plato, he wrote, on aesthetics, _System der
Kunstlehre_ (1805) and _Grundriss der Aesthetik_ (1807); on the history
of philosophy, _Grundlinien der Philosophie_ (1807, republished 1809,
but soon forgotten), _Grundriss einer Geschichte der Philosophie_ (1807
and 1825), and _Hauptmomente der Geschichte der Philosophie_ (1829); in
philology, _Grundlinien der Philologie_ (1808), and _Grundlinien der
Grammatik, Hermeneutik und Kritik_ (1808).