ASTER (Gr. [Greek: astaer], a star), the name of a genus of plants,
given from the fact of the flowers having a radiated or star-like
appearance (see below). The Greek word also provides many derivatives:
e.g. _asterism_ (Gr. [Greek: asterismos]), a constellation (q.v.);
_asteroid_ (Gr. [Greek: astero-eidaes], star-like), an alternative name
for planetoids or minor planets (see PLANET).

The genus of composite plants named aster (natural order _Compositae_)
is found largely in North America, and scattered sparingly over Asia,
Europe and South America. They are usually herbaceous perennials; their
flowers arranged in numerous heads (_capitula_) recall those of the
daisy, whence they are popularly known in England as Michaelmas daisies,
since many are in bloom about that time. They are valuable plants in a
garden, the various species flowering from late summer right on to
November or December. The only British species is _Aster Tripolium_,
found abundantly in saline marshes near the sea. One of the species,
_Aster alpinus_, grows at a considerable height on the mountains of
Europe. Some of them, such as _Aster spectabilis_ of North America, are
very showy. They are mostly easy to cultivate in ordinary garden soil,
and are readily propagated by dividing the roots in early spring. The
following are some of the better known forms:--_A. alpinus_, barely 1
ft. high, and _A. Amellus_, 1½ ft., with its var. _bessarabicus_, have
broadish blunt leaves and large starry bluish flowers; _A. longifolius_
var. _formosus_, 2 ft., bright rosy lilac; _A. acris_, 2 to 3 ft., with
blue flowers in August; _A. ericoides_, 3 ft., with heath-like leaves
and masses of small white flowers; _A. puniceus_, 4 to 6 ft., blue or
rosy-lilac; _A. turbinellus_, 2 to 3 ft., mauve-coloured, are showy
border plants; and _A. Novae-Angliae_, 5 to 6 ft., rosy-violet; _A.
Novi-Belgii_, 3 to 6 ft., pale blue; _A. laevis_, 2 to 6 ft.,
blue-lilac; and _A. grandiflorus_, 3 ft., violet, are especially useful
from their late-flowering habit.

The China aster (_Callistephus chinensis_) is also a member of the order
_Compositae_. It is a hardy annual, a native of China, which by
cultivation has yielded a great variety of forms. Some of the best for
ornamental gardening are the chrysanthemum-flowered, the
paeony-flowered, the crown or cockade, the comet, and the globe-quilled.
Crown asters have a white centre, and dark crimson or purple
circumference, and are very beautiful. The colours range from white and
blush through pink and rose to crimson, and from lilac through blue to
purple, in various shades. They should be sown early in March in pans,
in a gentle heat, the young plants being quickly transferred to a cool
pit, and there pricked out in rich soil as soon as large enough, and
eventually planted out in the garden in May or June, in soil which has
been well worked and copiously manured, where they grow from 8 to 18
in. high, and flower towards the end of summer. They also make handsome
pot plants for the conservatory.