ASTORIA, a city, port of entry, and the county-seat of Clatsop county,
Oregon, U.S.A., on the Columbia river, 8 m. from its mouth. Pop. (1890)
6184; (1900) 8381, of whom 3779 were foreign-born (many being Finns,--a
Finnish weekly was established here in 1905), and 601 were Chinese;
(1910, census) 9599. It is served by the Astoria & Columbia River
railroad (Northern Pacific System), and by several coastwise and foreign
steamship lines (including that of the Oregon Railway & Navigation Co.).
The river here is about 6 m. wide, and the city has a water-front of
about 5 m. and a deep, spacious and placid harbour. By dredging and the
construction of jetties the Federal government has since 1885 greatly
improved the channel at the mouth of the river. The business portion of
the city occupies the low ground of the river bottom; the residence
portion is on the hillsides overlooking the harbour. Astoria is the port
of entry for the Oregon Customs District, Oregon; in 1907 its imports
were valued at $21,262, and its exports at $329,103. The city is
especially important as a salmon fishing and packing centre (cod,
halibut and smaller fish also being abundant); it has also an extensive
lumber trade, important lumber manufactories, pressed brick and
terra-cotta factories, and dairy interests. In 1905 the value of the
factory product was $3,092,628 (of which $1,759,871 was the value of
preserved and canned fish), being an increase of 41.8% in five years.
Astoria is the oldest American settlement in the Columbia Valley. It was
founded in 1811, as a depot for the fur trade, by John Jacob Astor, in
whose honour it was named. It was seized by the British in 1813, but was
restored in 1818. In 1821, while occupied by the North-West Fur Company,
it was burned and practically abandoned, only a few settlers remaining.
It was chartered as a city in 1876.

  See Washington Irving's _Astoria; or Anecdotes of an Enterprise beyond
  the Rocky Mountains_ (Philadelphia, 1836).