ASTOR, JOHN JACOB (1763-1848), American merchant, was born at the
village of Walldorf, near Heidelberg, Germany, on the 17th of July 1763.
Until he was sixteen he worked in the shop of his father, a butcher; he
then joined an elder brother in London, and there for four years was
employed in the piano and flute factory of an uncle, of the firm of
Astor & Broadwood. In 1783 he emigrated to America, and settled in New
York, whither one of his brothers had previously gone. On the voyage he
became acquainted with a fur-trader, by whose advice he devoted himself
to the same business, buying furs directly from the Indians, preparing
them at first with his own hands for the market, and selling them in
London and elsewhere at a great profit. He was also the agent in New
York of the firm of Astor & Broadwood. By his energy, industry and sound
judgment he gradually enlarged his operations, did business in all the
fur markets of the world, and amassed an enormous fortune,--the largest
up to that time made by any American. He devoted many years to carrying
out a project for organizing the fur trade from the Great Lakes to the
Pacific Ocean, and thence by way of the Hawaiian Islands to China and
India. In 1811 he founded at the mouth of the Columbia river a
settlement named after him Astoria, which was intended to serve as the
central depot; but two years later the settlement was seized and
occupied by the English. The incidents of this undertaking are the theme
of Washington Irving's _Astoria_. A series of disasters frustrated the
gigantic scheme. Astor made vast additions to his wealth by investments
in real estate in New York City, and erected many buildings there,
including the hotel known as the Astor House. The last twenty-five years
of his life were spent in retirement in New York City, where he died on
the 29th of March 1848, his fortune then being estimated at about
$30,000,000. He made various charitable bequests by his will, and among
them a gift of $50,000 to found an institution, opened as the "Astor
House" in 1854, for the education of poor children and the relief of the
aged and the destitute in his native village in Germany. His chief
benefaction, however, was a bequest of $400,000 for the foundation and
endowment of a public library in New York City, since known as the Astor
library, and since 1895 part of the New York public library.

  See Parton's _Life of John Jacob Astor_ (New York, 1865).

His eldest son, WILLIAM BACKHOUSE ASTOR (1792-1875), inherited the
greater part of his father's fortune, and chiefly by judicious
investments in real estate greatly increased it. He was sometimes known
as the "Landlord of New York." Under his direction the building for the
Astor library was erected, and to the library he gave about $550,000,
including a bequest of $200,000. His son, JOHN JACOB ASTOR (1822-1890),
was also well known as a capitalist and philanthropist, giving liberally
to the Astor library.

The son of the last named, WILLIAM WALDORF ASTOR (1848-   ), served in
the New York assembly in 1877, and in the state senate in 1880-81. He
was United States minister to Italy from 1882 to 1885. He published two
romances, _Valentine_ (1885) and _Sforza_ (1889). His wealth, arising
from property in New York, where also he built the New Netherland hotel
and the Waldorf hotel, was enormous. In 1890 he removed to England, and
in 1899 was naturalized. In 1893 he became proprietor of the _Pall Mall
Gazette_, and afterwards started the _Pall Mall Magazine_.