ASTROLABE (from Gr. [Greek: astron], star, and [Greek: labein], to
take), an instrument used not only for stellar, but for solar and lunar
altitude-taking. The principle of the astrolabe is explained in fig. 2.
There were two kinds,--spherical and planispheric. The earliest forms
were "armillae" and spherical. Gradually, from Eratosthenes to Tycho,
Hipparchus playing the most important part among ancient astronomers,
the complex astrolabe was evolved, large specimens being among the chief
observatory instruments of the 15th, 16th and even 17th centuries; while
small ones were in use among travellers and learned men, not only for
astronomical, but for astrological and topographical purposes. Nearly
every one of the modern instruments used for the observations of
physical astronomy is a part of the perfected astrolabe. A collection of
circles such as is the armillary sphere, if each circle were fitted with
a view-tube, might be considered a complete astrolabe. Tycho's armillae
were astrolabes. In fact the modern equatorial, and the altitude and
azimuth circle are astrolabes in the strictest and oldest meaning of the
term; and Tycho in one of his astrolabes came so near the modern
equatorial that it may be taken as the first of the kind.

[Illustration: PLATE.

FIG. 1.--PERSIAN ASTROLABE (c. 1712) INSCRIBED IN ARABIC.

  FRONT, showing the _Rete_ or _Spider_, a network of star pointers.
  Beneath the _Rete_, in a hollow, are four thin brass discs, called
  Tables or Climates, engraved with projections of the sphere for
  different latitudes.

  BACK, showing graduations, parallelogram for measuring heights; and
  other tables, together with the _Rule_ with sights (A) held by a
  moveable pin (B), known as the _Horse_ or _Wedge_.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Principle of the Astrolabe. If a solid circle be
fixed in any one position and a tube be pivoted on its centre so as to
move; and if the line C D be drawn upon the circle pointing towards any
object Q in the heavens which lies in the plane of the circle, by
turning the tube A B towards any other object P in the plane of the
circle, the angle BOD will be the angle subtended by the two objects P
and Q at the eye.]

[Illustration: From _Exercises_, by T. Blundeville.

FIG. 3.--Mariner's Astrolabe, A.D. 1594. Made of brass, or of heavy
wood: it varied in size from a few inches to 1 ft. in diameter.]

The two forms of the planispheric astrolabe most widely known and used
in the 15th, 16th and even 17th centuries were: (1) the _portable
astrolabe_ shown in fig. 1 (Plate). This originated in the East, and was
in early use in India, Persia and Arabia, and was introduced into Europe
by the Arabs, who had perfected it--perhaps as early as A.D. 700. It
combines the planisphere and armillae of Hipparchus and others, and the
theodolite of Theon, and was usually of brass, varying in diameter from
a couple of inches to a foot or more. It was used for taking the
altitudes of sun, moon and stars; for calculating latitude; for
determining the points of the compass, and time; for ascertaining
heights of mountains, &c.; and for construction of horoscopes. The
instrument was a marvel of convenience and ingenuity, and was called
"the mathematical jewel." Nevertheless it passed out of use, because
incapable of any great precision.

(2) The _mariner's astrolabe_, fig. 3, was adapted from that of
astronomers by Martin Behaim, c. 1480. This was the instrument used by
Columbus. With the tables of the sun's declination then available, he
could calculate his latitude by meridian altitudes of the sun taken with
his astrolabe. The mariner's astrolabe was superseded by John Hadley's
quadrant of 1731.

  AUTHORITIES.--Chaucer, _Treatise on the Astrolabe_ (Skeat's edition of
  Chaucer); J.J. Stöffler, _Elucidatio Fabrice ususque Astrolabii_, &c.;
  Thomas Blundeville, _His Exercises_ (1594); F. Ritter, _Astrolabium_;
  W.H. Morley, _Description of Astrolabe of Shah Husain_; M.L. Huggins,
  "The Astrolabe" (_Astrophysical Journal_, 1894); _Penny Cyclopaedia_,
  article "Astrolabe;" R. Grant, _History of Physical Astronomy_.
       (M. L. H.)