ASTRAKHAN, a government of S.E. Russia, on the lower Volga, bounded N.
by the governments of Samara and Saratov, W. by Saratov and the
government of the Don Cossacks, S. by Stavropol and Terek, and E. by the
Caspian Sea and the government of the Urals. Area, 91,327 sq. m., of
which 6730 sq. m. belong to the delta of the Volga and its brackish
lagoons, and 62,290 sq. m. are covered by the Kalmuck and Kirghiz
Steppes. The surface is a low-lying plain, except that in the west the
Ergeni Hills (500-575 ft.) form the water-parting between the Volga
basin and that of the Don. The climate is very hot and dry, the average
temperature for the year being 50° Fahr., for January 21°, and for July
78°, rainfall 7.3 in., but often there is no rain at all in the summer.
Pop. (1897) 1,005,460, of whom 132,383 were urban. The Kalmucks (138,580
in 1897) and Kirghiz (260,000) are semi-nomads. In addition to them the
population includes nearly 44,000 Tatars, 4270 Armenians, with Poles and
Jews. Fishing off the mouth of the Volga gives occupation to 50,000
persons; the fish, chiefly herrings and sturgeon, together with the
caviare prepared from the latter, are sold for the most part at
Nizhniy-Novgorod. Over 300,000 tons of salt are extracted annually from
the lakes, principally those of Baskunchak and Elton. Cattle-breeding is
an important industry. Market-gardening (mustard, water-melons, fruit)
is on the increase; but pure agriculture is relatively not much
developed. The government is divided into five districts, the chief
towns of which are Astrakhan, Enotayevsk (pop. 2810 in 1897),
Krasnyi-yar (4680), Chernyi-yar (5140), and Tsarev (8900). The
Kalmucks and Kirghiz have their own local administrations, and so have
the Astrakhan Cossacks (25,600).