ATACAMA, a province of northern Chile, bounded N. and S. respectively by
the provinces of Antofagasta and Coquimbo, and extending from the
Pacific coast E. to the Argentine boundary line. It has an area of
30,729 sq. m., lying in great part within the Atacama desert region (see
below), and a population (1902) of 71,446. The silver and copper mines
of the province are numerous, some of them ranking among the most
productive known, but the majority are worked with limited capital and
on a small scale. The silver ore was first discovered in 1832 by a
shepherd at a place which bears his name, Juan Godoi. The nitrate and
borax deposits are extensive and productive, and common salt is a
natural product of large areas in the elevated desert regions of the
Andes. The exports include copper and silver and their ores, nitrate of
soda, borax, guano and other minerals in small quantities. The capital,
Copiapó (est. pop. 8991 in 1902), is situated on a small river of the
same name 37 m. from the coast and 51 m. south-east by rail from
Caldera, the principal port of this great mining district. Before 1842,
when guano began to attract notice as an exportable product, Atacama was
considered as Bolivian territory, and Coquimbo the extreme northern
province of Chile. In that year Chile decided to explore the desert
coast, and in 1843 that part of the desert extending north to the 26th
parallel was organized into the province of Atacama.