ATCHISON, a city and the county-seat of Atchison county, Kansas, U.S.A.,
on the west bank of the Missouri river, which is navigable at this point
but is utilized comparatively little for commerce. Pop. (1890) 13,963;
(1900) 15,722, of whom 2508 were of negro descent and 1308 were
foreign-born; (1910) 16,429. Atchison is served by the Atchison, Topeka
& Santa Fé, the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy, the Chicago, Rock Island &
Pacific, and the Missouri Pacific railways. The city is the seat of
Midland College (Lutheran, 1887), St Benedict's College (Roman Catholic,
1858) for boys, Mt. Scholastics Academy (Roman Catholic) for girls, and
Western Theological Seminary (Evangelical-Lutheran, 1893); a state
soldiers' orphans' home is also located here. Atchison's situation and
transportation facilities make it an important supply-centre, its trade
in grains and live-stock being particularly large; it has large railway
machine shops, and its principal manufactures are flour, furniture,
lumber, hardware and drugs. The value of the city's factory products
increased from $2,093,469 in 1900 to $4,052,274 in 1905, or 93.6%.
Atchison was founded in 1854 by pro-slavery partisans, and was named in
honour of their leader, David Rice Atchison, a United States senator.
The city was quickly surpassed by Leavenworth in commercial importance,
and during the Kansas struggle was never of great political importance.
Its first city charter was granted in 1858. The Atchison _Globe_
(established 1878) is one of the best-known of western papers.