ATH, or AATH, an ancient town of the province of Hainaut, Belgium,
situated on the left bank of the Dender. Pop. (1890) 9868; (1904)
11,201. Formerly it was fortified, but after the change in the defensive
system of Belgium in 1858 the fortress was dismantled and its ramparts
superseded by boulevards. Owing to a fire caused by lightning its fine
church of St Julien, dating from the 14th century, which had escaped
serious injury during many wars, was destroyed in 1817 (since rebuilt).
This left the Tour Burbant as its sole relic of the middle ages. This
tower formed part of the _donjon_ of the fortress erected by Baldwin
IV., count of Hainaut, about the year 1150. Near Ath is the fine castle
of Beloeil, the ancient seat of the princely family of Ligne. Ath is
famous for its gild of archers, whose butts are erected on the plain of
the Esplanade in the centre of the town. The town militia has the
privilege of being armed with bows and crossbows. Ath is also well known
in Hainaut for its annual fête called _le jour de ducasse--ducasse_
being the Walloon word for kermesse (fête). On this occasion a
procession escorting figures of two giants, Goliath, called locally
Goyasse, and Samson, forms the chief feature of the celebration. The
emperor Joseph II. stopped it for its "idolatrous" character, but this
act was one of the causes of the Brabant revolution of 1789. The
procession, revived in 1790, was again stopped by the French republicans
five years later, but was revived under the Empire, and has flourished
ever since.