ATHENS, a village and the county-seat of Athens county, Ohio, U.S.A., in
the township of Athens, on the Hocking river, about 76 m. E.S.E. of
Columbus. Pop. (1890) 2620; (1900) 3066; (1910) 5463; of the township
(1910) 10,156. It is served by the Baltimore & Ohio Southwestern, the
Toledo & Ohio Central (Ohio Central Lines), and the Hocking Valley
railways. The village is built on rolling ground rising about 70 ft.
above the river (which nearly encircles it), and commands views of some
of the most beautiful scenery in the state. There are several ancient
mounds in the vicinity. Athens is the seat of Ohio University
(co-educational), a state institution established in 1804, and having in
1908 a college of liberal arts, a state normal college (1902), a
commercial college, a college of music and a state preparatory school.
In 1908 the University had 53 instructors and 1386 students. South of
the village, and occupying a fine situation, is a state hospital for the
insane. In the vicinity there are many coal mines, and among the
manufactures are bricks, furniture, veneered doors, and shirts. The
municipality operates the water-works. When the Ohio Company, through
Manasseh Cutler, obtained from congress their land in what is now Ohio,
it was arranged that the income from two townships was to be set aside
"for the support of a literary institution." In 1795 the townships
(Athens and Alexander) were located and surveyed, and in 1800 Rufus
Putnam and two other commissioners, appointed by the Territorial
legislature, laid out a town, which was also called Athens. Settlers
slowly came; the town became the county-seat in 1805, was incorporated
as a village in 1811, and was re-incorporated in 1828.
