ATHENS, a city and the county-seat of Clarke county, Georgia, U.S.A., in
the N.E. part of the state, about 73 m. E. by N. of Atlanta. Pop. (1890)
8639; (1900) 10,245, of whom 5190 were negroes and only 114 were
foreign-born; (1910, census) 14,913. It is served by the Georgia, the
Central of Georgia, the Southern, the Seaboard Air Line and the
Gainesville Midland railways. Athens is an important educational centre.
It was founded in 1801 as the seat of the university of Georgia, which
had been chartered in 1785. Franklin College, the academic department of
the university, was opened in 1801, and afterwards the State College of
Agriculture and Mechanic Arts (the School of Science, 1872), the State
Normal School (co-educational, 1891), the School of Pharmacy (1903), the
University Summer School (1903), the School of Forestry (1906), and the
Georgia State College of Agriculture (1906), also branches of the
university, were established at Athens, and what had been the Lumpkin
Law School (incorporated in 1859) became the law department of the
university in 1867. Branches of the university not in Athens are: the
North Georgia Agricultural College (established in 1871; became a part
of the university in 1872), at Dahlonega; the medical department, at
Augusta (1873; founded as the Georgia Medical College in 1829); the
Georgia School of Technology (1885), at Atlanta; the Georgia Normal and
Industrial College for Girls (1889), at Milledgeville; and the Georgia
Industrial College for Colored Youth (1890), near Savannah. At Athens
also are several secondary schools, and the Lucy Cobb Institute (for
girls), opened in 1858 and named in honour of a daughter of its founder,
Gen. T.R.R. Cobb (1823-1862). The city has various manufactures, the
most important being fertilizers, cotton goods, and cotton-seed oil and
cake; the value of the total factory product in 1905 was $1,158,205, an
increase of 70.9% in five years. Athens was chartered as a city in 1872.