ANNO, or HANNO, SAINT (c. 1010-1075), archbishop of Cologne, belonged to
a Swabian family, and was educated at Bamberg. He became confessor to
the emperor Henry III., who appointed him archbishop of Cologne in 1056.
He took a prominent part in the government of Germany during the
minority of King Henry IV., and was the leader of the party which in
1062 seized the person of Henry, and deprived his mother, the empress
Agnes, of power. For a short time Anno exercised the chief authority in
the kingdom, but he was soon obliged to share this with Adalbert,
archbishop of Bremen, retaining for himself the supervision of Henry's
education and the title of _magister_. The office of chancellor of the
kingdom of Italy was at this period regarded as an appanage of the
archbishopric of Cologne, and this was probably the reason why Anno had
a considerable share in settling the papal dispute in 1064. He declared
Alexander II. to be the rightful pope at a synod held at Mantua in May
1064, and took other steps to secure his recognition. Returning to
Germany, he found the chief power in the hands of Adalbert, and as he
was disliked by the young king, he left the court but returned and
regained some of his former influence when Adalbert fell from power in
1066. He succeeded in putting down a rising against his authority in
Cologne in 1074, and it was reported he had allied himself with William
the Conqueror, king of England, against the emperor. Having cleared
himself of this charge, Anno took no further part in public business,
and died at Cologne on the 4th of December 1075. He was buried in the
monastery of Siegburg and was canonized in 1183 by Pope Lucius III. He
was a founder of monasteries and a builder of churches, advocated
clerical celibacy and was a strict disciplinarian. He was a man of great
energy and ability, whose action in recognizing Alexander II. was of the
utmost consequence for Henry IV. and for Germany.

  There is a _Vita Annonis_, written about 1100, by a monk of Siegburg,
  but this is of slight value. It appears in the _Monumenta Germaniae
  historica: Scriptores_, Bd. xi. (Hanover and Berlin, 1826-1892). There
  is an "Epistola ad monachos Malmundarienses" by Anno in the _Neues
  Archiv der Gesellschaft f√ºr altere deutsche Geschichtskunde_, Bd. xiv.
  (Hanover, 1876 seq.). See also the _Annolied_, or _Incerti poetae
  Teutonici rhythmus de S. Annone_, written about 1180, and edited by J.
  Kehrein (Frankfort, 1865); Th. Lindner, _Anno II. der Heilige,
  Erzbischof von Koln_ (Leipzig, 1869).
