ANNUITY (from Lat. _annus_, a year), a periodical payment, made
annually, or at more frequent intervals, either for a fixed term of
years, or during the continuance of a given life, or a combination of
lives. In technical language an annuity is said to be payable for an
assigned _status_, this being a general word chosen in preference to
such words as "time," "term" or "period," because it may include more
readily either a term of years certain, or a life or combination of
lives. The magnitude of the annuity is the sum to be paid (and received)
in the course of each year. Thus, if £100 is to be received each year by
a person, he is said to have "an annuity of £100." If the payments are
made half-yearly, it is sometimes said that he has "a half-yearly
annuity of £100"; but to avoid ambiguity, it is more commonly said he
has an annuity of £100, payable by half-yearly instalments. The former
expression, if clearly understood, is preferable on account of its
brevity. So we may have quarterly, monthly, weekly, daily annuities,
when the annuity is payable by quarterly, monthly, weekly or daily
instalments. An annuity is considered as accruing during each instant of
the status for which it is enjoyed, although it is only payable at fixed
intervals. If the enjoyment of an annuity is postponed until after the
lapse of a certain number of years, the annuity is said to be deferred.
If an annuity, instead of being payable at the end of each year,
half-year, &c., is payable in advance, it is called an annuity-due.

If an annuity is payable for a term of years independent of any
contingency, it is called an _annuity certain_; if it is to continue for
ever, it is called a _perpetuity_; and if in the latter case it is not
to commence until after a term of years, it is called a _deferred
perpetuity_. An annuity depending on the continuance of an assigned life
or lives, is sometimes called a life annuity; but more commonly the
simple term "annuity" is understood to mean a life annuity, unless the
contrary is stated. A life annuity, to cease in any event after a
certain term of years, is called a _temporary annuity_. The holder of an
annuity is called an annuitant, and the person on whose life the annuity
depends is called the nominee.

If not otherwise stated, it is always understood that an annuity is
payable yearly, and that the annual payment (or rent, as it is sometimes
called) is £1. It is, however, customary to consider the annual payment
to be, not £1, but simply 1, the reader supplying whatever monetary unit
he pleases, whether pound, dollar, franc, Thaler, &c.

The annuity is the totality of the payments to be made (and received),
and is so understood by all writers on the subject; but some have also
used the word to denote an individual payment (or rent), speaking, for
instance, of the first or second year's annuity,--a practice which is
calculated to introduce confusion and should therefore be carefully
avoided.

Instances of perpetuities are the dividends upon the public stocks in
England, France and some other countries. Thus, although it is usual to
speak of £100 consols, the reality is the yearly dividend which the
government pays by quarterly instalments. The practice of the French in
this, as in many other matters, is more logical. In speaking of their
public funds (_rentes_) they do not mention the ideal capital sum, but
speak of the annuity or annual payment that is received by the public
creditor. Other instances of perpetuities are the incomes derived from
the debenture stocks of railway companies, also the feu-duties commonly
payable on house property in Scotland. The number of years' purchase
which the perpetual annuities granted by a government or a railway
company realize in the open market, forms a very simple test of the
credit of the various governments or railways.

_Terminable Annuities_ are employed in the system of British public
finance as a means of reducing the National Debt (q.v.). This result is
attained by substituting for a perpetual annual charge (or one lasting
until the capital which it represents can be paid off _en bloc_), an
annual charge of a larger amount, but lasting for a short term. The
latter is so calculated as to pay off, during its existence, the capital
which it replaces, with interest at an assumed or agreed rate, and under
specified conditions. The practical effect of the substitution of a
terminable annuity for an obligation of longer currency is to bind the
present generation of citizens to increase its own obligations in the
present and near future in order to diminish those of its successors.
This end might be attained in other ways; for instance, by setting aside
out of revenue a fixed annual sum for the purchase and cancellation of
debt (Pitt's method, in intention), or by fixing the annual debt charge
at a figure sufficient to provide a margin for reduction of the
principal of the debt beyond the amount required for interest (Sir
Stafford Northcote's method), or by providing an annual surplus of
revenue over expenditure (the "Old Sinking Fund"), available for the
same purpose. All these methods have been tried in the course of British
financial history, and the second and third of them are still employed;
but on the whole the method of terminable annuities has been the one
preferred by chancellors of the exchequer and by parliament.

Terminable annuities, as employed by the British government, fall under
two heads:--(a) Those issued to, or held by private persons; (b) those
held by government departments or by funds under government control. The
important difference between these two classes is that an annuity under
(a), once created, cannot be modified except with the holder's consent,
i.e. is practically unalterable without a breach of public faith;
whereas an annuity under (b) can, if necessary, be altered by
interdepartmental arrangement under the authority of parliament. Thus
annuities of class (a) fulfil most perfectly the object of the system as
explained above; while those of class (b) have the advantage that in
times of emergency their operation can be suspended without any
inconvenience or breach of faith, with the result that the resources of
government can on such occasions be materially increased, apart from any
additional taxation. For this purpose it is only necessary to retain as
a charge on the income of the year a sum equal to the (smaller)
perpetual charge which was originally replaced by the (larger)
terminable charge, whereupon the difference between the two amounts is
temporarily released, while ultimately the increased charge is extended
for a period equal to that for which it is suspended. Annuities of class
(a) were first instituted in 1808, but are at present mainly regulated
by an act of 1829. They may be granted either for a specified life, or
two lives, or for an arbitrary term of years; and the consideration for
them may take the form either of cash or of government stock, the latter
being cancelled when the annuity is set up. Annuities (b) held by
government departments date from 1863. They have been created in
exchange for permanent debt surrendered for cancellation, the principal
operations having been effected in 1863, 1867, 1870, 1874, 1883 and
1899. Annuities of this class do not affect the public at all, except of
course in their effect on the market for government securities. They are
merely financial operations between the government, in its capacity as
the banker of savings banks and other funds, and itself, in the capacity
of custodian of the national finances. Savings bank depositors are not
concerned with the manner in which government invests their money, their
rights being confined to the receipt of interest and the repayment of
deposits upon specified conditions. The case is, however, different as
regards forty millions of consols (included in the above figures),
belonging to suitors in chancery, which were cancelled and replaced by a
terminable annuity in 1883. As the liability to the suitors in that case
was for a specified amount of stock, special arrangements were made to
ensure the ultimate replacement of the precise amount of stock
cancelled.

_Annuity Calculations._--The mathematical theory of life annuities is
based upon a knowledge of the rate of mortality among mankind in
general, or among the particular class of persons on whose lives the
annuities depend. It involves a mathematical treatment too complicated
to be dealt with fully in this place, and in practice it has been
reduced to the form of tables, which vary in different places, but which
are easily accessible. The history of the subject may, however, be
sketched. Abraham Demoivre, in his _Annuities on Lives_, propounded a
very simple law of mortality which is to the effect that, out of 86
children born alive, 1 will die every year until the last dies between
the ages of 85 and 86. This law agreed sufficiently well at the middle
ages of life with the mortality deduced from the best observations of
his time; but, as observations became more exact, the approximation was
found to be not sufficiently close. This was particularly the case when
it was desired to obtain the value of joint life, contingent or other
complicated benefits. Therefore Demoivre's law is entirely devoid of
practical utility. No simple formula has yet been discovered that will
represent the rate of mortality with sufficient accuracy.

The rate of mortality at each age is, therefore, in practice usually
determined by a series of figures deduced from observation; and the
value of an annuity at any age is found from these numbers by means of a
series of arithmetical calculations. The mortality table here given is
an example of modern use.

The first writer who is known to have attempted to obtain, on correct
mathematical principles, the value of a life annuity, was Jan De Witt,
grand pensionary of Holland and West Friesland. Our knowledge of his
writings on the subject is derived from two papers contributed by
Frederick Hendriks to the _Assurance Magazine_, vol. ii. p. 222, and
vol. in. p. 93. The former of these contains a translation of De Witt's
report upon the value of life annuities, which was prepared in
consequence of the resolution passed by the states-general, on the 25th
of April 1671, to negotiate funds by life annuities, and which was
distributed to the members on the 30th of July 1671. The latter contains
the translation of a number of letters addressed by De Witt to
Burgomaster Johan Hudde, bearing dates from September 1670 to October
1671. The existence of De Witt's report was well known among his
contemporaries, and Hendriks collected a number of extracts from various
authors referring to it; but the report is not contained in any
collection of his works extant, and had been entirely lost for 180
years, until Hendriks discovered it among the state archives of Holland
in company with the letters to Hudde. It is a document of extreme
interest, and (notwithstanding some inaccuracies in the reasoning) of
very great merit, more especially considering that it was the very first
document on the subject that was ever written.


TABLE OF MORTALITY--HM, HEALTHY LIVES--MALE.

_Number Living and Dying at each Age, out of 10,000 entering at Age 10._

  +------+---------+--------+------+---------+--------+
  | Age. | Living. | Dying. | Age. | Living. | Dying. |
  +------+---------+--------+------+---------+--------+
  |  10  | 10,000  |   79   |  54  |   6791  |   129  |
  |  11  |  9,921  |    0   |  55  |   6662  |   153  |
  |  12  |  9,921  |   40   |  56  |   6509  |   150  |
  |  13  |  9,881  |   35   |  57  |   6359  |   152  |
  |  14  |  9,846  |   40   |  58  |   6207  |   156  |
  |  15  |  9,806  |   22   |  59  |   6051  |   153  |
  |  16  |  9,784  |    0   |  60  |   5898  |   184  |
  |  17  |  9,784  |   41   |  61  |   5714  |   186  |
  |  18  |  9,743  |   59   |  62  |   5528  |   191  |
  |  19  |  9,684  |   68   |  63  |   5337  |   200  |
  |  20  |  9,616  |   56   |  64  |   5137  |   206  |
  |  21  |  9,560  |   67   |  65  |   4931  |   215  |
  |  22  |  9,493  |   59   |  66  |   4716  |   220  |
  |  23  |  9,434  |   73   |  67  |   4496  |   220  |
  |  24  |  9,361  |   64   |  68  |   4276  |   237  |
  |  25  |  9,297  |   48   |  69  |   4039  |   246  |
  |  26  |  9,249  |   64   |  70  |   3793  |   213  |
  |  27  |  9,185  |   60   |  71  |   3580  |   222  |
  |  28  |  9,125  |   71   |  72  |   3358  |   268  |
  |  29  |  9,054  |   67   |  73  |   3090  |   243  |
  |  30  |  8,987  |   74   |  74  |   2847  |   300  |
  |  31  |  8,913  |   65   |  75  |   2547  |   241  |
  |  32  |  8,848  |   74   |  76  |   2306  |   245  |
  |  33  |  8,774  |   73   |  77  |   2061  |   224  |
  |  34  |  8,701  |   76   |  78  |   1837  |   226  |
  |  35  |  8,625  |   71   |  79  |   1611  |   219  |
  |  36  |  8,554  |   75   |  80  |   1392  |   196  |
  |  37  |  8,479  |   81   |  81  |   1196  |   191  |
  |  38  |  8,398  |   87   |  82  |   1005  |   173  |
  |  39  |  8,311  |   88   |  83  |    832  |   172  |
  |  40  |  8,223  |   81   |  84  |    660  |   119  |
  |  41  |  8,142  |   85   |  85  |    541  |   117  |
  |  42  |  8,057  |   87   |  86  |    424  |    92  |
  |  43  |  7,970  |   84   |  87  |    332  |    72  |
  |  44  |  7,886  |   93   |  88  |    260  |    74  |
  |  45  |  7,793  |   97   |  89  |    186  |    36  |
  |  46  |  7,696  |   96   |  90  |    150  |    34  |
  |  47  |  7,600  |  107   |  91  |    116  |    36  |
  |  48  |  7,493  |  106   |  92  |     80  |    36  |
  |  49  |  7,387  |  113   |  93  |     44  |    29  |
  |  50  |  7,274  |  120   |  94  |     15  |     0  |
  |  51  |  7,154  |  124   |  95  |     15  |     5  |
  |  52  |  7,030  |  120   |  96  |     10  |    10  |
  |  53  |  6,910  |  119   |      |         |        |
  +------+---------+--------+------+---------+--------+

It appears that it had long been the practice in Holland for life
annuities to be granted to nominees of any age, in the constant
proportion of double the rate of interest allowed on stock; that is to
say, if the towns were borrowing money at 6%, they would be willing to
grant a life annuity at 12%, and so on. De Witt states that "annuities
have been sold, even in the present century, first at six years'
purchase, then at seven and eight; and that the majority of all life
annuities now current at the country's expense were obtained at nine
years' purchase"; but that the price had been increased in the course of
a few years from eleven years' purchase to twelve, and from twelve to
fourteen. He also states that the rate of interest had been
successively reduced from 6¼ to 5%, and then to 4%. The principal object
of his report is to prove that, taking interest at 4%, a life annuity
was worth at least sixteen years' purchase; and, in fact, that an
annuitant purchasing an annuity for the life of a young and healthy
nominee at sixteen years' purchase, made an excellent bargain. It may be
mentioned that he argues that it is more to the advantage, both of the
country and of the private investor, that the public loans should be
raised by way of grant of life annuities rather than perpetual
annuities. It appears conclusively from De Witt's correspondence with
Hudde, that the rate of mortality assumed as the basis of his
calculations was deduced from careful examination of the mortality that
had actually prevailed among the nominees on whose lives annuities had
been granted in former years. De Witt appears to have come to the
conclusion that the probability of death is the same in any half-year
from the age of 3 to 53 inclusive; that in the next ten years, from 53
to 63, the probability is greater in the ratio of 3 to 2; that in the
next ten years, from 63 to 73, it is greater in the ratio of 2 to 1; and
in the next seven years, from 73 to 80, it is greater in the ratio of 3
to 1; and he places the limit of human life at 80. If a mortality table
of the usual form is deduced from these suppositions, out of 212 persons
alive at the age of 3, 2 will die every year up to 53, 3 in each of the
ten years from 53 to 63, 4 in each of the next ten years from 63 to 73,
and 6 in each of the next seven years from 73 to 80, when all will be
dead.

De Witt calculates the value of an annuity in the following way. Assume
that annuities on 10,000 lives each ten years of age, which satisfy the
Hm mortality table, have been purchased. Of these nominees 79 will die
before attaining the age of 11, and no annuity payment will be made in
respect of them; none will die between the ages of 11 and 12, so that
annuities will be paid for one year on 9921 lives; 40 attain the age of
12 and die before 13, so that two payments will be made with respect to
these lives. Reasoning in this way we see that the annuities on 35 of
the nominees will be payable for three years; on 40 for four years, and
so on. Proceeding thus to the end of the table, 15 nominees attain the
age of 95, 5 of whom die before the age of 96, so that 85 payments will
be paid in respect of these 5 lives. Of the survivors all die before
attaining the age of 97, so that the annuities on these lives will be
payable for 86 years. Having previously calculated a table of the values
of annuities certain for every number of years up to 86, the value of
all the annuities on the 10,000 nominees will be found by taking 40
times the value of an annuity for 2 years, 35 times the value of an
annuity for 3 years, and so on--the last term being the value of 10
annuities for 86 years--and adding them together; and the value of an
annuity on one of the nominees will then be found by dividing by 10,000.
Before leaving the subject of De Witt, we may mention that we find in
the correspondence a distinct suggestion of the law of mortality that
bears the name of Demoivre. In De Witt's letter, dated the 27th of
October 1671 (_Ass. Mag_. vol. iii. p. 107), he speaks of a "provisional
hypothesis" suggested by Hudde, that out of 80 young lives (who, from
the context, may be taken as of the age 6) about 1 dies annually. In
strictness, therefore, the law in question might be more correctly
termed Hudde's than Demoivre's.

De Witt's report being thus of the nature of an unpublished state paper,
although it contributed to its author's reputation, did not contribute
to advance the exact knowledge of the subject; and the author to whom
the credit must be given of first showing how to calculate the value of
an annuity on correct principles is Edmund Halley. He gave the first
approximately correct mortality table (deduced from the records of the
numbers of deaths and baptisms in the city of Breslau), and showed how
it might be employed to calculate the value of an annuity on the life of
a nominee of any age (see _Phil. Trans_. 1693; _Ass. Mag_. vol. xviii.).

Previously to Halley's time, and apparently for many years subsequently,
all dealings with life annuities were based upon mere conjectural
estimates. The earliest known reference to any estimate of the value of
life annuities rose out of the requirements of the Falcidian law, which
(40 B.C.) was adopted in the Roman empire, and which declared that a
testator should not give more than three-fourths of his property in
legacies, so that at least one-fourth must go to his legal
representatives. It is easy to see how it would occasionally become
necessary, while this law was in force, to value life annuities charged
upon a testator's estate. Aemilius Macer (A.D. 230) states that the
method which had been in common use at that time was as follows:--From
the earliest age until 30 take 30 years' purchase, and for each age
after 30 deduct 1 year. It is obvious that no consideration of compound
interest can have entered into this estimate; and it is easy to see that
it is equivalent to assuming that all persons who attain the age of 30
will certainly live to the age of 60, and then certainly die. Compared
with this estimate, that which was propounded by the praetorian prefect
Ulpian was a great improvement. His table is as follows:--

  +-------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
  |     Age.    |   Years'  |    Age.    |  Years'   |
  |             | Purchase. |            | Purchase  |
  +-------------+-----------+------------+-----------+
  | Birth to 20 |    30     |  45 to 46  |     14    |
  |     20 " 25 |    28     |  46  " 47  |     13    |
  |     25 " 30 |    25     |  47  " 48  |     12    |
  |     30 " 35 |    22     |  48  " 49  |     11    |
  |     35 " 40 |    20     |  49  " 50  |     10    |
  |     40 " 41 |    19     |  50  " 55  |      9    |
  |     41 " 42 |    18     |  55  " 60  |      7    |
  |     42 " 43 |    17     |    60 and  |           |
  |     43 " 44 |    16     |    upwards |      5    |
  |     44 " 45 |    15     |            |           |
  +-------------+-----------+------------+-----------+

Here also we have no reason to suppose that the element of interest was
taken into consideration; and the assumption, that between the ages of
40 and 50 each addition of a year to the nominee's age diminishes the
value of the annuity by one year's purchase, is equivalent to assuming
that there is no probability of the nominee dying between the ages of 40
and 50. Considered, however, simply as a table of the average duration
of life, the values are fairly accurate. At all events, no more correct
estimate appears to have been arrived at until the close of the 17th
century.

  The mathematics of annuities has been very fully treated in Demoivre's
  _Treatise on Annuities_ (1725); Simpson's _Doctrine of Annuities and
  Reversions_ (1742); P. Gray, _Tables and Formulae_; Baily's _Doctrine
  of Life Annuities_; there are also innumerable compilations of
  _Valuation Tables_ and _Interest Tables_, by means of which the value
  of an annuity at any age and any rate of interest may be found. See
  also the article INTEREST, and especially that on INSURANCE.

_Commutation tables_, aptly so named in 1840 by Augustus De Morgan (see
his paper "On the Calculation of Single Life Contingencies," _Assurance
Magazine_, xii. 328), show the proportion in which a benefit due at one
age ought to be changed, so as to retain the same value and be due at
another age. The earliest known specimen of a commutation table is
contained in William Dale's _Introduction to the Study of the Doctrine
of Annuities_, published in 1772. A full account of this work is given
by F. Hendriks in the second number of the _Assurance Magazine_, pp.
15-17. William Morgan's _Treatise on Assurances_, 1779, also contains a
commutation table. Morgan gives the table as furnishing a convenient
means of checking the correctness of the values of annuities found by
the ordinary process. It may be assumed that he was aware that the table
might be used for the direct calculation of annuities; but he appears to
have been ignorant of its other uses.

The first author who fully developed the powers of the table was John
Nicholas Tetens, a native of Schleswig, who in 1785, while professor of
philosophy and mathematics at Kiel, published in the German language an
_Introduction to the Calculation of Life Annuities and Assurances_. This
work appears to have been quite unknown in England until F. Hendriks
gave, in the first number of the _Assurance Magazine_, pp. 1-20 (Sept.
1850), an account of it, with a translation of the passages describing
the construction and use of the commutation table, and a sketch of the
author's life and writings, to which we refer the reader who desires
fuller information. It may be mentioned here that Tetens also gave only
a specimen table, apparently not imagining that persons using his work
would find it extremely useful to have a series of commutation tables,
calculated and printed ready for use.

The use of the commutation table was independently developed in
England-apparently between the years 1788 and 1811--by George Barrett,
of Petworth, Sussex, who was the son of a yeoman farmer, and was himself
a village schoolmaster, and afterwards farm steward or bailiff. It has
been usual to consider Barrett as the originator in England of the
method of calculating the values of annuities by means of a commutation
table, and this method is accordingly sometimes called Barrett's method.
(It is also called the commutation method and the columnar method.)
Barrett's method of calculating annuities was explained by him to
Francis Baily in the year 1811, and was first made known to the world in
a paper written by the latter and read before the Royal Society in 1812.

By what has been universally considered an unfortunate error of
judgment, this paper was not recommended by the council of the Royal
Society to be printed, but it was given by Baily as an appendix to the
second issue (in 1813) of his work on life annuities and assurances.
Barrett had calculated extensive tables, and with Baily's aid attempted
to get them published by subscription, but without success; and the only
printed tables calculated according to his manner, besides the specimen
tables given by Baily, are the tables contained in Babbage's
_Comparative View of the various Institutions for the Assurance of
Lives_, 1826.

In the year 1825 Griffith Davies published his _Tables of Life
Contingencies_, a work which contains, among others, two tables, which
are confessedly derived from Baily's explanation of Barrett's tables.

  Those who desire to pursue the subject further can refer to the
  appendix to Baily's _Life Annuities and Assurances_, De Morgan's paper
  "On the Calculation of Single Life Contingencies," _Assurance
  Magazine_, xii. 348-349; Gray's _Tables and Formulae_ chap. viii.; the
  preface to Davies's _Treatise on Annuities_; also Hendriks's papers in
  the _Assurance Magazine_, No. 1, p. 1, and No. 2, p. 12; and in
  particular De Morgan's "Account of a Correspondence between Mr George
  Barrett and Mr Francis Baily," in the _Assurance Magazine_, vol. iv.
  p. 185.

  The principal commutation tables published in England are contained in
  the following works:--David Jones, _Value of Annuities and
  Reversionary Payments_, issued in parts by the Useful Knowledge
  Society, completed in 1843; Jenkin Jones, _New Rate of Mortality_,
  1843; G. Davies, _Treatise on Annuities_, 1825 (issued 1855); David
  Chisholm, _Commutation Tables_, 1858; Nelson's _Contributions to Vital
  Statistics_, 1857; Jardine Henry, _Government Life Annuity Commutation
  Tables_, 1866 and 1873; _Institute of Actuaries Life Tables_, 1872;
  R.P. Hardy, _Valuation Tables_, 1873; and Dr William Farr's
  contributions to the sixth (1844), twelfth (1849), and twentieth
  (1857) _Reports_ of the Registrar General in England (English Tables,
  I. 2), and to the _English Life Table_, 1864.

  The theory of annuities may be further studied in the discussions in
  the English _Journal of the Institute of Actuaries_. The institute was
  founded in the year 1848, the first sessional meeting being held in
  January 1849. Its establishment has contributed in various ways to
  promote the study of the theory of life contingencies. Among these may
  be specified the following:--Before it was formed, students of the
  subject worked for the most part alone, and without any concert; and
  when any person had made an improvement in the theory, it had little
  chance of becoming publicly known unless he wrote a formal treatise on
  the whole subject. But the formation of the institute led to much
  greater interchange of opinion among actuaries, and afforded them a
  ready means of making known to their professional associates any
  improvements, real or supposed, that they thought they had made.
  Again, the discussions which follow the reading of papers before the
  institute have often served, first, to bring out into bold relief
  differences of opinion that were previously unsuspected, and
  afterwards to soften down those differences,--to correct extreme
  opinions in every direction, and to bring about a greater agreement of
  opinion on many important subjects. In no way, probably, have the
  objects of the institute been so effectually advanced as by the
  publication of its _Journal_. The first number of this work, which was
  originally called the _Assurance Magazine_, appeared in September
  1850, and it has been continued quarterly down to the present time. It
  was originated by the public spirit of two well-known actuaries (Mr
  Charles Jellicoe and Mr Samuel Brown), and was adopted as the organ of
  the Institute of Actuaries in the year 1852, and called the _Assurance
  Magazine and Journal of the Institute of Actuaries_, Mr Jellicoe
  continuing to be the editor,--a post he held until the year 1867, when
  he was succeeded by Mr T.B. Sprague (who contributed to the 9th
  edition of this Encyclopaedia an elaborate article on "Annuities," on
  which the above account is based). The name was again changed in 1866,
  the words "Assurance Magazine" being dropped; but in the following
  year it was considered desirable to resume these, for the purpose of
  showing the continuity of the publication, and it is now called the
  _Journal of the Institute of Actuaries and Assurance Magazine_. This
  work contains not only the papers read before the institute (to which
  have been appended of late years short abstracts of the discussions on
  them), and many original papers which were unsuitable for reading,
  together with correspondence, but also reprints of many papers
  published elsewhere, which from various causes had become difficult of
  access to the ordinary reader, among which may be specified various
  papers which originally appeared in the _Philosophical Transactions_,
  the _Philosophical Magazine_, the _Mechanics' Magazine_, and the
  _Companion to the Almanac_; also translations of various papers from
  the French, German, and Danish. Among the useful objects which the
  continuous publication of the _Journal_ of the institute has served,
  we may specify in particular two:--that any supposed improvement in
  the theory was effectually submitted to the criticisms of the whole
  actuarial profession, and its real value speedily discovered; and that
  any real improvement, whether great or small, being placed on record,
  successive writers have been able, one after the other, to take it up
  and develop it, each commencing where the previous one had left off.
