ANSELME (Father Anselme of the Virgin Mary) (1625-1694), French
genealogist, was born in Paris in 1625. As a layman his name was Pierre
Guibours. He entered the order of the barefooted Augustinians on the
31st of March 1644, and it was in their monastery (called the Couvent
des Petits Pères, near the church of Notre-Dame des Victoires) that he
died, on the 17th of January 1694. He devoted his entire life to
genealogical studies. In 1663 he published _Le Palais de l'honneur_,
which besides giving the genealogy of the houses of Lorraine and Savoy,
is a complete treatise on heraldry, and in 1664 _Le Palais de la
gloire_, dealing with the genealogy of various illustrious French and
European families. These books made friends for him, the most intimate
among whom, Honoré Caille, seigneur du Fourny (1630-1713), persuaded him
to publish his _Histoire généalogique de la maison royale de France, et
des grands officiers de la couronne_ (1674, 2 vols. 4); after Father
Anselme's death, Honoré Caille collected his papers, and brought out a
new edition of this highly important work in 1712. The task was taken up
and continued by two other friars of the Couvent des Petits Pères,
Father Ange de Sainte-Rosalie (François Raffard, 1655-1726), and Father
Simplicien (Paul Lucas, 1683-1759), who published the first and second
volumes of the third edition in 1726. This edition consists of nine
volumes folio; it is a genealogical and chronological history of the
royal house of France, of the peers, of the great officers of the crown
and of the king's household, and of the ancient barons of the kingdom.
The notes were generally compiled from original documents, references to
which are usually given, so that they remain useful to the present day.
The work of Father Anselme, his collaborators and successors, is even
more important for the history of France than is Dugdale's _Baronage of
England_ for the history of England.     (C. B.*)
