ANSON, SIR WILLIAM REYNELL, BART. (1843-   ), English jurist, was born
on the 14th of November 1843, at Walberton, Sussex, son of the second
baronet. Educated at Eton and Balliol College, Oxford, he took a first
class in the final classical schools in 1866, and was elected to a
fellowship of All Souls in the following year. In 1869 he was called to
the bar, and went the home circuit until 1873, when he succeeded to the
baronetcy. In 1874 he became Vinerian reader in English law at Oxford, a
post which he held until he became, in 1881, warden of All Souls
College. He identified himself both with local and university interests;
he became an alderman of the city of Oxford in 1892, chairman of quarter
sessions for the county in 1894, was vice-chancellor of the university
in 1898-1899, and chancellor of the diocese of Oxford in 1899. In that
year he was returned, without opposition, as M.P. for the university in
the Liberal Unionist interest, and consequently resigned the
vice-chancellorship. In parliament he preserved an active interest in
education, being a member of the newly created consultative committee of
the Board of Education in 1900, and in 1902 he became parliamentary
secretary. He took an active part in the foundation of a school of law
at Oxford, and his volumes on _The Principles of the English Law of
Contract_, (1884, 11th ed. 1906), and on _The Law and Custom of the
Constitution_ in two parts, "The Parliament" and "The Crown" (1886-1892.
3rd ed. 1907, pt. i. vol. ii.), are standard works.