ANSTRUTHER (locally pronounced _Anster_), a seaport of Fifeshire,
Scotland. It comprises the royal and police burghs of Anstruther Easter
(pop. 1190), Anstruther Wester (501) and Kilrenny (2542), and lies 9 m.
S.S.E. of St Andrews, having a station on the North British railway
company's branch line from Thornton Junction to St Andrews. The chief
industries include coast and deep-sea fisheries, shipbuilding, tanning,
the making of cod-liver oil and fish-curing. The harbour was completed
in 1877 at a cost of £80,000. The two Anstruthers are divided only by a
small stream called Dreel Burn. James Melville (1556-1614), nephew of
the more celebrated reformer, Andrew Melville, who was minister of
Kilrenny, has given in his _Diary_ a graphic account of the arrival at
Anstruther of a weatherbound ship of the Armada, and the tradition of
the intermixture of Spanish and Fifeshire blood still prevails in the
district. Anstruther fair supplied William Tennant (1784-1848), who was
born and buried in the town, with the subject of his poem of "Anster
Fair." Sir James Lumsden, a soldier of fortune under Gustavus Adolphus,
who distinguished himself in the Thirty Years' War, was born in the
parish of Kilrenny about 1598. David Martin (1737-1798), the painter and
engraver; Thomas Chalmers (1780-1847), the great divine; and John
Goodsir (1814-1867), the anatomist, were natives of Anstruther. Little
more than a mile to the west lies the royal and police burgh of
Pittenweem (Gaelic, "the hollow of the cave"), a quaint old fishing town
(pop. 1863), with the remains of a priory. About 2 m. still farther
westwards is the fishing town of St Monans or Abercromby (pop. 1898),
with a fine old Gothic church, picturesquely perched on the rocky shore.
These fisher towns on the eastern and south-eastern coasts of Fifeshire
furnish artists with endless subjects. Archibald Constable (1774-1827),
Sir Walter Scott's publisher, was born in the parish of Carnbee, about 3
m. to the north of Pittenweem. The two Anstruthers, Kilrenny and
Pittenweem unite with St Andrews, Cupar and Crail, in sending one member
to parliament.