'ANTARA IBN SHADDAD, Arabian poet and warrior of the 6th century, was
famous both for his poetry and his adventurous life. His chief poem is
contained in the _Mo'allakât_. The account of his life forms the basis
of a long and extravagant romance. His father Shaddad was a soldier, his
mother Zabuba a negro slave. Neglected at first, he soon claimed
attention and respect for himself, and by his remarkable personal
qualities and courage in battle he gained his freedom and the
acknowledgment of his father. He took part in the great war between the
related tribes of Abs and Dhubyan, which began over a contest of horses
and was named after them the war of Dahis and Ghabra. He died in a
fight against the tribe of Tai. His poems, which are chiefly concerned
with fighting or with his love for Abla, are published in W. Ahlwardt's
_The Diwans of the six ancient Arabic Poets_ (London, 1870); they have
also been published separately at Beirût (1888). As regards their
genuineness, cf. W. Ahlwardt's _Bemerkungen uber die Aechtheit der alten
arabichen Gedichte_ (Greifswald, 1872), pp. 50 ff. _The Romance of
'Antar_ (Sîrat 'Antar ibn Shaddad) is a work which was long handed down
by oral tradition only, has grown to immense proportions and has been
published in 32 vols. at Cairo, 1307 (A.D. 1889), and in 10 vols. at
Beirût, 1871. It was partly translated by Terrick Hamilton under the
title _'Antar, a Bedoueen Romance_ (4 vols., London, 1820).

  For an account of the poet and his works see H. Thorbeckes, _Antarah,
  ein vorislamischer Dichter_ (Leipzig, 1867), and cf. the _Book of
  Songs_ (see ABULFARAJ), vol. vii. pp. 148-153.     (G. W. T.)