ANTALCIDAS, Spartan soldier and diplomatist. In 393 (or 392 B.C.) he was
sent to Tiribazus, satrap of Sardis, to undermine the friendly relations
then existing between Athens and Persia by offering to recognize Persian
claims to the whole of Asia Minor. The Athenians sent an embassy under
Conon to counteract his efforts. Tiribazus, who was favourable to
Sparta, threw Conon into prison, but Artaxerxes II. (Mnemon) disapproved
and recalled his satrap. In 388 Antalcidas, then commander of the
Spartan fleet, accompanied Tiribazus to the Persian court, and secured
the active assistance of Persia against Athens. The success of his naval
operations in the neighbourhood of the Hellespont was such that Athens
was glad to accept terms of peace (the "Peace of Antalcidas"), by which
(1) the whole of Asia Minor, with the islands of Clazomenae and Cyprus,
was recognized as subject to Persia, (2) all other Greek cities--so far
as they were not under Persian rule--were to be independent, except
Lemnos, Imbros and Scyros, which were to belong, as formerly, to the
Athenians. The terms were announced to the Greek envoys at Sardis in the
winter 387-386, and were finally accepted by Sparta in 386. Antalcidas
continued in favour with Artaxerxes, until the annihilation of Spartan
supremacy at Leuctra diminished his influence. A final mission to
Persia, probably in 367, was a failure, and Antalcidas, deeply chagrined
and fearful of the consequences, is said to have starved himself to
death. (See SPARTA.)