ANTEQUERA (the ancient _Anticaria_), a town of southern Spain, in the
province of Málaga; on the Bobadilla-Granada railway. Pop. (1900)
31,609. Antequera overlooks the fertile valley bounded on the S. by the
Sierra de los Torcales, and on the N. by the river Guadalhorce. It
occupies a commanding position, while the remains of its walls, and of a
fine Moorish castle on a rock that overhangs the town, show how
admirably its natural defences were supplemented by art. Besides several
interesting churches and palaces, it contains a fine arch, erected in
1595 in honour of Philip II., and partly constructed of inscribed Roman
masonry. In the eastern suburbs there is one of the largest grave-mounds
in Spain, said to be of prehistoric date, and with subterranean chambers
excavated to a depth of 65 ft. The Peña de los Enamorados, or "Lovers'
Peak," is a conspicuous crag which owes its name to the romantic legend
adapted by Robert Southey (1774-1843) in his _Laila and Manuel_. Woollen
fabrics are manufactured, and the sugar industry established in 1890
employs several thousand hands; but the majority of the inhabitants are
occupied by the trade in grain, fruit, wine and oil. Marble is quarried;
and at El Torcal, 6 m. south, there is a very curious labyrinth of red
marble rocks. Antequera was captured from the Moors in 1410, and became
until 1492 one of the most important outposts of the Christian power in
Spain.

  See C. Fernandez, _Historia de Antequera, desde su fondacion_ (Malaga,
  1842).