ANTELOPE, a zoological name which, so far as can be determined, appears
to trace its origin, through the Latin, to _Pantholops_, the old Coptic,
and _Antholops_, the late Greek name of the fabled unicorn. Its adoption
by the languages of Europe cannot apparently be traced farther back than
the 4th century of our era, at which date it was employed to designate
an imaginary animal living on the banks of the Euphrates. By the earlier
English naturalists, and afterwards by Buffon, it was, however, applied
to the Indian blackbuck, which is thus entitled to rank as _the_
antelope. It follows that the subfamily typified by this species, in
which are included the gazelles, is the one to which alone the term
antelopes should be applied if it were employed in a restricted and
definable sense.

Although most people have a general vague idea of what constitutes an
"antelope," yet the group of animals thus designated is one that does
not admit of accurate limitations or definition. Some, for instance, may
consider that the chamois and the so-called white goat of the Rocky
Mountains are entitled to be included in the group; but this is not the
view held by the authors of the _Book of Antelopes_ referred to below;
and, as a matter of fact, the term is only a vague designation for a
number of more or less distinct groups of hollow-horned ruminants which
do not come under the designation of cattle, sheep or goats; and in
reality there ought to be a distinct English group-name for each
subfamily into which "antelopes" are subdivided.

The great majority of antelopes, exclusive of the doubtful chamois group
(which, however, will be included in the present article), are African,
although the gazelles are to a considerable extent an Asiatic group.
They include ruminants varying in size from a hare to an ox; and
comprise about 150 species, although this number is subject to
considerable variation according to personal views as to the limitations
of species and races. No true antelopes are American, the prongbuck
(_Antilocapra_), which is commonly called "antelope" in the United
States, representing a distinct group; while, as already mentioned, the
Rocky Mountain or white goat stands on the borderland between antelopes
and goats.

The first group, or _Tragelaphinae_, is represented by the African
elands (_Taurotragus_), bongo (_Boöcercus_), kudus (_Strepsiceros_) and
bushbucks or harnessed antelopes (_Tragelaphus_), and the Indian nilgai
(_Boselaphus_). Except in the bongo and elands, horns are present only
in the males, and these are angulated and generally spirally twisted,
and without rings. The muzzle is naked, small glands are present on the
face below the eyes, and the tail is comparatively long. The colours are
often brilliant; white spots and stripes being prevalent. The harnessed
antelopes, or bushbucks, are closely allied to the kudus, from which
they chiefly differ by the spiral formed by the horns generally having
fewer turns. They include some of the most brilliantly coloured of all
antelopes; the ornamentation taking the form of vertical white lines and
rows of spots. Usually the sexes differ in colour. Whereas most of the
species have hoofs of normal shape, in some, such as the nakong, or
situtunga (_Tragelaphus spekei_), these are greatly elongated, in order
to be suited for walking in soft mud, and these have accordingly been
separated as _Limnotragus_. The last-named species spends most of its
time in water, where it may be observed not infrequently among the reeds
with all but its head and horns submerged. The true or smaller
bushbucks, represented by the widely spread _Tragelaphus scriptus_, with
several local races (fig. 1) are sometimes separated as _Sylvicapra_,
leaving the genus _Tragelaphus_ to be represented by the larger _T.
angasi_ and its relatives. The genus _Strepsiceros_ is represented by
the true or great kudu (_S. capensis_ or _S. strepsiceros_), fig. 2,
ranging from the Cape to Somaliland, and the smaller _S. imberbis_ of
North-East Africa, which has no throat-fringe. The large and brightly
coloured bongo (_Boöcercus euryceros_) of the equatorial
forest-districts serves in some respects to connect the bushbucks with
the elands, having horns in both sexes, and a tufted tail, but a
brilliant orange coat with vertical white stripes. Still larger are the
elands, of which the typical _Taurotragus oryx_ of the Cape is uniformly
sandy-coloured, although stripes appear in the more northern _T. o.
livingstonei_, while the black-necked eland (_T. derbianus_) of
Senegambia and the Bahr-el-Ghazal district is a larger and more
brilliantly coloured animal. The small horns and bluish-grey colour of
the adult bulls serve to distinguish the Indian nilgai (q.v.),
_Boselaphus tragocamdus_, from the other members of the subfamily.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Female Bushbuck (_Tragelaphus scriptus_).]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Male Kudu (_Strepsicero capensis_).]

The second group, which is mainly African, but also represented in
Syria, is that of the _Hippotraginae_, typified by the sable antelope
(_Hippotragus niger_) and roan antelope (_H. equinus_), but also
including the oryxes (_Oryx_) and addax. These are for the most part
large antelopes, with long cylindrical horns, which are present in both
sexes, hairy muzzles, no face-glands, long tufted tails and tall thick
molars of the ox-type. In _Hippotragus_ the stout and thickly ringed
horns rise vertically from a ridge above the eyes at an obtuse angle to
the plane of the lower part of the face, and then sweep backwards in a
bold curve; while there are tufts of long white hairs near the eyes. The
sable antelope is a southern species in which both sexes are black or
blackish when adult, while the lighter-coloured and larger roan antelope
has a much wider distribution. The South African blauwbok (_H.
leucophaeus_) is extinct. In the addax (_Addax nasomaculatus_), which is
a distinct species common to North Africa and Syria, the ringed horns
form an open spiral ascending in the plane of the face, and there is
long, shaggy, dark hair on the fore-quarters in winter. The various
species of oryx differ from _Hippotragus_ by the absence of the white
eye-tufts, and by the horns sloping backwards in the plane of the face.
In the South African gemsbuck (_Oryx gazella_), fig. 3, the East African
beisa or true oryx (_O. beisa_), and the white Arabian (_O. beatrix_)
the horns are straight, but in the North African white oryx or algazel
(_O. leucoryx_ or _O. algazal_) they are scimitar-shaped, the colour of
this species being white and pale chestnut (see ADDAX, ORYX, and SABLE
ANTELOPE).

The third subfamily is the _Antilopinae_, the members of which have a
much wider geographical range than either of the foregoing groups. The
subfamily is characterized by the narrow crowns of the molars, which are
similar to those of sheep, and the hairy muzzle. Generally there are
face-glands below the eyes; and the tail is moderate or short. Pits are
present in the forehead of the skull, and the horns are ringed for part
of their length, with a compressed base, their form being often lyrate,
but sometimes spiral. Lateral hoofs are generally present.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Gemsbuck, or Cape Oryx (_Oryx gazella_).]

Gazelles (_Gazella_), which form by far the largest genus of the
subfamily, are inhabitants of open and frequently more or less desert
districts. They are mostly of a sandy colour, with dark and light
markings on the face, and often a dark band on the flanks. The horns are
more or less lyrate, and generally developed in both sexes; there are
frequently brushes of hair on the knees. Gazelles may be divided into
groups. The one to which the North African _G. dorcas_ belongs is
characterized by the presence of lyrate or sub-lyrate horns in both
sexes, and by the white of the buttocks not extending on to the
haunches. Nearly allied is the group including the Indian _G. bennetti_
and the Arabian _G. arabica_, in which the horns have a somewhat
S-shaped curvature in profile. In the group represented by the African
_G. granti_, _G. thomsoni_, _G. mohr_, &c., the white of the buttocks
often sends a prolongation on to the flanks, the horns are long and the
size is large. Lastly, the Central Asian _G. gutturosa_, _G.
subgutturosa_ and _G. picticaudata_ form a group in which the females
are hornless and the face-markings inconspicuous or wanting.

The South African springbuck (_Antidorcas euchore_) is nearly related to
the gazelles, from which it is distinguished by the presence on the
middle line of the loins of an evertible pouch, lined with long white
hairs capable of erection. It has also one premolar tooth less in the
lower jaw. Formerly these beautiful antelopes existed in countless
numbers on the plains of South Africa, and were in the habit of
migrating in droves which completely filled entire valleys. Now they are
comparatively rare.

The dibatag or Clarke's gazelle (_Ammodorcas clarkei_), of Somaliland,
forms a kind of connecting link between the true gazelles and the
gerenuk, this being especially shown in the skull. The face has the
ordinary gazelle-markings; but the rather short horns--which are wanting
in the female--have a peculiar upward and forward curvature, unlike that
obtaining in the gazelles and somewhat resembling that of the reedbuck.
The neck is longer and more slender than in ordinary gazelles, and the
tail is likewise relatively long. Although local, these animals are
fairly common in the interior of Somaliland, where they are known by the
name of dibatag. In running, the head and neck are thrown backwards,
while the tail is turned forwards over the back.

The East African gerenuk (q.v.), or Waller's gazelle (_Lithocranius
walleri_), of which two races have been named, is a very remarkable
ruminant, distinguished not only by its exceedingly elongated neck and
limbs, but also by the peculiar hooked form of the very massive horns of
the bucks, the dense structure and straight profile of the skull, and
the extreme slenderness of the lower jaw.

A still more aberrant gazelle is a small North-East African species
known as the beira (_Dorcatragus melanotis_), with very short horns,
large hoofs and a general appearance recalling that of some of the
members of the subfamily _Neotraginae_, although in other respects
gazelle-like. The blackbuck (_Antilope cervicapra_ or _A. bezoartica_)
of India, a species taking its name from the deep black coat assumed by
the adult bucks, and easily recognized by the graceful, spirally twisted
horns ornamenting the heads of that sex, is now the sole representative
of the genus _Antilope_, formerly taken to embrace the whole of the true
antelopes. Large face-glands are characteristic of the species, which
inhabits the open plains of India in large herds. They leap high in the
air, like the springbuck, when on the move.

With the palla (q.v.), or impala (_Aepyceros melampus_), we reach an
exclusively African genus, characterized by the lyrate horns of the
bucks, the absence of lateral hoofs, and the presence of a pair of
glands with black tufts of hair on the hind-feet.

The sheep-like saiga (q.v.), _Saiga tatarica_, of the Kirghiz steppes
stands apart from all other antelopes by its curiously puffed and
trunk-like nose, which can be wrinkled up when the animal is feeding and
has the nostrils opening downwards. More or less nearly related to the
saiga is the chiru (q.v.), _Pantholops hodgsoni_ of Tibet, characterized
by the long upright black horns of the bucks, and the less convex nose,
in which the nostrils open anteriorly instead of downwards.

The _Neotraginae_ (or _Nanotraginae_) form an exclusively African group
of small-sized antelopes divided into several, for the most part nearly
related, genera. Almost the only characters they possess in common are
the short and spike-like horns of the bucks, which are ringed at the
base, with smooth tips, and the large size of the face-gland, which
opens by a circular aperture. _Neotragus_ is represented by the pigmy
royal antelope (_N. pygmaeus_) of Guinea; _Hylarnus_ includes one
species from Cameroon and a second from the Semliki forest; while
_Nesotragus_ comprises the East African suni antelopes, _N. moschatus_
and _N. livingstonianus_. All three might, however, well be included in
_Neotragus_. The royal antelope is the smallest of the Bovidae.

The steinbok (_Rhaphiceros campestris_) and the _grysbok_ (_R.
melanotis_) are the best-known representatives of a group characterized
by the vertical direction of the horns and the small gland-pit in the
skull; lateral hoofs being absent in the first-named and present in the
second. A bare gland-patch behind the ear serves to distinguish the
oribis or ourebis, as typified by _Oribia montana_ of the Cape; lateral
hoofs being present and the face-pit large.

From all the preceding the tiny dik-diks (_Madoqua_) of North-East
Africa differ by their hairy noses, expanded in some species into short
trunks; while the widely spread klipspringer (q.v.), _Oreotragus
saltator_, with its several local races, is unfailingly distinguishable
by its rounded blunt hoofs and thick, brittle, golden-flecked hair.

In some respects connecting the last group with the _Cervicaprinae_ is
the rhebok, or vaal-rhebok (_Pelea capreolus_), a grey antelope of the
size of a roebuck, with small upright horns in the bucks recalling those
of the last group, and small lateral hoofs, but no face-glands. In size
and several structural features it approximates to the more typical
_Cervicaprinae_, as represented by the reedbuck (_Cervicapra_), and the
waterbucks and kobs (_Cobus_ or _Kobus_), all of which are likewise
African. These are medium-sized or large antelopes with naked muzzles,
narrow sheep-like upper molars, fairly long tails, rudimentary or no
face-glands, and pits in the frontal bones of the skull. Reedbuck
(q.v.), or rietbok (_Cervicapra_), are foxy-red antelopes ranging in
size from a fallow-deer to a roe, with thick bushy tails, forwardly
curving black horns, and a bare patch of glandular skin behind each ear.
They keep to open country near water. The waterbuck (q.v.), _Cobus_, on
the other hand, actually seek refuge from pursuit in the water. They
have heavily fringed necks, tufted tails, long lyrate horns in the bucks
(fig. 4) but no glandular ear-patches. The true waterbuck (_C.
ellipsiprymnus_), and the defassa or sing-sing (_C. defassa_), are the
two largest species, equal in size to red deer, and grey or reddish in
colour. Of the smaller forms or kobs, _C. maria_ and _C. leucotis_ of
the swamps of the White Nile are characterized by the black coats of the
adult bucks; the West African _C. cob_, and its East African
representative _C. thomasi_, are wholly red antelopes of the size of
roedeer; the lichi or lechwe (_C. lichi_) is characterized by its long
horns, black fore-legs and superior size; while the puku (_C. vardoni_),
which is also a swamp-loving species from South-Central Africa, differs
from the three preceding species by the fore-legs being uniformly foxy.

[Ilustration: FIG. 4.--Waterbuck (_Cobus ellipsiprymnus_).]

The duikers, or duikerboks (_Cephalophus_), of Africa, which range in
size from a large hare to a fallow-deer, typify the subfamily
_Cephalophinae_, characterized by the spike-like horns of the bucks, the
elongated aperture of the face-glands, the naked muzzle, the relatively
short tail, and the square-crowned upper molars; lateral hoofs being
present. In the duikers themselves the single pair of horns is set in
the midst of a tuft of long hairs, and the face-gland opens in a long
naked line on the side of the face above the muzzle. The group is
represented in India by the chousingha or four-horned antelope
(_Tetraceros quadricornis_), generally distinguished by the feature from
which it takes its name (see DUIKER).

The last section of the true antelopes is the _Bubalinae_, represented
by the hartebeest (q.v.), _Bubalis_, blesbok and sassaby (_Damaliscus_),
and the gnu (q.v.) or wildebeest (_Connochaetes_, also called
_Catoblepas_), all being African with the exception of one or two
hartebeests which range into Syria. All these are large and generally
more or less uniformly coloured antelopes with horns in both sexes, long
and more or less hairy tails, high withers, small face-glands, naked
muzzles, tall, narrow upper molars, and the absence of pits in the
frontal bones. The long face, high crest for the horns, which are
ringed, lyrate and more or less strongly angulated, and the moderately
long tail, are the distinctive features of the hartebeests. They are
large red antelopes (fig. 5), often with black markings on the face and
limbs. In _Damaliscus_, which includes, among many other species, the
blesbok and bontebok (_D. albifrons_ and _D. pygargus_) and the sassaby
or bastard hartebeest (_D. lunatus_), the face is shorter, and the horns
straighter and set on a less elevated crest. The colour, too, of these
antelopes tends in many cases to purple, with white markings. From the
hartebeest the gnus (fig. 6) differ by their smooth and outwardly or
downwardly directed horns, broad bristly muzzles, heavy manes and long
horse-like tails. There are two chief types, the white-tailed gnu or
black wildebeest (_Connochaetes gnu_) of South Africa, now nearly
extinct (fig. 6), and the brindled gnu, or blue wildebeest (_C.
taurinus_), which, with some local variation, has a large range in South
and East Africa.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Cape Hartebeest (_Bubalis cama_).]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--White-tailed Gnu, or Black Wildebeest
(_Connochaetes gnu_).]

In concluding this survey of living antelopes, reference may be made to
the subfamily _Rupicaprinae_ (typified by the European chamois), the
members of which, as already stated, are in some respects intermediate
between antelopes and goats. They are all small or medium-sized mountain
ruminants, for the most part European and Asiatic, but with one North
American representative. They are heavily built ruminants, with horns of
nearly equal size in both sexes, short tapering tails, large hoofs,
narrow goat-like upper molars, and usually small face-glands. The horns
are generally rather small, upright, ringed at the base, and more or
less curved backwards, but in the takin they are gnu-like. The group is
represented by the European chamois or gemse (_Rupicapra tragus_ or _R.
rupicapra_), broadly distinguished by its well-known hook-like horns,
and the Asiatic gorals (_Urotragus_) and serows (_Nemorhaedus_), which
are represented by numerous species ranging from Tibet, the Himalaya,
and China, to the Malay Peninsula and islands, being in the two latter
areas the sole representatives of both antelopes and goats. In the
structure of its horns the North American white Rocky Mountain goat
(_Oreamnus_) is very like a serow, from which it differs by its
extremely short cannon-bones. In the latter respect this ruminant
resembles the takin (_Budorcas_) of Tibet, which, as already mentioned,
has horns recalling those of the white-tailed gnu. Possibly the Arctic
musk-ox (_Ovibos_) may be connected with the takin by means of certain
extinct ruminants, such as the North American Pleistocene
_Euceratherium_ and the European Pliocene _Criotherium_ (see CHAMOIS,
GORAL, SEROW, ROCKY MOUNTAIN GOAT and TAKIN).

_Extinct Antelopes._--Only a few lines can be devoted to extinct
antelopes, the earliest of which apparently date from the European
Miocene. An antelope from the Lower Pliocene of Northern India known as
_Bubalis_, or _Damaliscus, palaeindicus_ indicates the occurrence of the
hartebeest group in that country. _Cobus_ also occurs in the same
formation, as does likewise _Hippotragus_. _Palaeoryx_ from the
corresponding horizon in Greece and Samos is to some extent intermediate
between _Hippotragus_ and _Oryx_. Gazelles are common in the Miocene and
Pliocene of both Europe and Asia. Elands and kudus appear to have been
represented in India during the Pliocene; the European _Palaeoreas_ of
the same age seems to be intermediate between the two, while
_Protragelaphus_ is evidently another European representative of the
group. _Helicophora_ is another spiral-horned European Pliocene
antelope, but of somewhat doubtful affinity; the same being the case
with the large _Criotherium_ of the Samos Pliocene, in which the short
horns are curiously twisted. As already stated, there is a possibility
of this latter ruminant being allied both to the takin and the musk-ox.
_Palaeotragus_ and _Tragoceros_, of the Lower Pliocene of Greece, at one
time regarded as antelopes, are now known to be ancestors of the okapi.

  For antelopes in general, see P.L. Sclater and O. Thomas, _The Book of
  Antelopes_ (4 vols., London, 1894-1900).     (R. L.*)