ANTHESTERIA, one of the four Athenian festivals in honour of Dionysus,
held annually for three days (11th-13th) in the month of Anthesterion
(February-March). The object of the festival was to celebrate the
maturing of the wine stored at the previous vintage, and the beginning
of spring. On the first day, called _Pithoigia_ (opening of the casks),
libations were offered from the newly opened casks to the god of wine,
all the household, including servants and slaves, joining in the
festivities. The rooms and the drinking vessels in them were adorned
with spring flowers, as were also the children over three years of age.
The second day, named _Choës_ (feast of beakers), was a time of
merrymaking. The people dressed themselves gaily, some in the disguise
of the mythical personages in the suite of Dionysus, and paid a round of
visits to their acquaintances. Drinking clubs met to drink off matches,
the winner being he who drained his cup most rapidly. Others poured
libations on the tombs of deceased relatives. On the part of the state
this day was the occasion of a peculiarly solemn and secret ceremony in
one of the sanctuaries of Dionysus in the Lenaeum, which for the rest of
the year was closed. The basilissa (or basilinna), wife of the archon
basileus for the time, went through a ceremony of marriage to the wine
god, in which she was assisted by fourteen Athenian matrons, called
_geraerae_, chosen by the basileus and sworn to secrecy. The days on
which the Pithoigia and Choës were celebrated were both regarded as
[Greek: apophrades] (_nefasti_) and [Greek: miarai] ("defiled"),
necessitating expiatory libations; on them the souls of the dead came up
from the underworld and walked abroad; people chewed leaves of
whitethorn and besmeared their doors with tar to protect themselves from
evil. But at least in private circles the festive character of the
ceremonies predominated. The third day was named _Chytri_ (feast of
pots, from [Greek: chytros], a pot), a festival of the dead. Cooked
pulse was offered to Hermes, in his capacity of a god of the lower
world, and to the souls of the dead. Although no performances were
allowed at the theatre, a sort of rehearsal took place, at which the
players for the ensuing dramatic festival were selected.

The name Anthesteria, according to the account of it given above, is
usually connected with [Greek: anthos] ("flower," or the "bloom" of the
grape), but A.W. Verrall (_Journal of Hellenic Studies_, xx., 1900, p.
115) explains it as a feast of "revocation" (from [Greek:
anathessasthai], to "pray back" or "up"), at which the ghosts of the
dead were recalled to the land of the living (_cp._ the Roman _mundus
patet_). J.E. Harrison (_ibid_. 100, 109, and _Prolegomena_), regarding
the Anthesteria as primarily a festival of all souls, the object of
which was the expulsion of ancestral ghosts by means of placation,
explains [Greek: pithoigia] as the feast of the opening of the graves
([Greek: pithos] meaning a large urn used for burial purposes), [Greek:
choes] as the day of libations, and [Greek: chutroi] as the day of the
grave-holes (not "pots," which is [Greek: chutrai]), in point of time
really anterior to the [Greek: pithoigia]. E. Rohde and M.P. Nilsson,
however, take the [Greek: chutroi] to mean "water vessels," and connect
the ceremony with the Hydrophoria, a libation festival to propitiate the
dead who had perished in the flood of Deucalion.

  See F. Hiller von Gartringen in Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopadie_
  (s.v.); J. Girard in Daremberg and Saglio, _Dictionnaire des
  antiquités_ (s.v. "Dionysia"); and F.A. Voigt in Roscher's _Lexikon
  der Mythologie_ (s.v. "Dionysos"); J.E. Harrison, _Prolegomena to the
  Study of Greek Religion_ (1903); M.P. Nilsson, _Studia de Dionysiis
  Atticis_ (1900) and _Griechische Feste_ (1906); G.F. Schömann,
  _Griechische Alterthümer_, ii. (ed. J.H. Lipsius, 1902), p. 516; A.
  Mommsen, _Feste der Stadt Athen_ (1898); E. Rohde, _Psyche_ (4th ed.,
  1907), p. 237.