ANTHRACENE (from the Greek [Greek: anthrax], coal), C14H10, a
hydrocarbon obtained from the fraction of the coal-tar distillate
boiling between 270° and 400° C. This high boiling fraction is allowed
to stand for some days, when it partially solidifies. It is then
separated in a centrifugal machine, the low melting-point impurities are
removed by means of hot water, and the residue is finally hot-pressed.
The crude anthracene cake is purified by treatment with the higher
pyridine bases, the operation being carried out in large steam-jacketed
boilers. The whole mass dissolves on heating, and the anthracene
crystallizes out on cooling. The crystallized anthracene is then removed
by a centrifugal separator and the process of solution in the pyridine
bases is repeated. Finally the anthracene is purified by sublimation.

Many synthetical processes for the preparation of anthracene and its
derivatives are known. It is formed by the condensation of acetylene
tetrabromide with benzene in the presence of aluminium chloride:--

        Br·CH·Br                     /CH\
  C6H6 +   |    + C6H6 = 4HBr + C6H4< |  >C6H4,
        Br·CH·Br                     \CH/

and similarly from methylene dibromide and benzene, and also when benzyl
chloride is heated with aluminium chloride to 200° C. By condensing
ortho-brombenzyl bromide with sodium, C.L. Jackson and J.F. White
(_Ber_., 1879, 12, p. 1965) obtained dihydro-anthracene

       /CH2Br           Br\                     /CH2\
  C6H4<       + 4Na +      >C6H4 = 4NaBr + C6H4<     >C6H4.
       \Br           BrCH2/                     \CH2/

Anthracene has also been obtained by heating ortho-tolylphenyl ketone
with zinc dust

       /CH8                 /CH \
  C6H4<        = H2O + C6H4<  |  >C6H4.
       \COC6H5              \CH /

Anthracene crystallizes in colourless monoclinic tables which show a
fine blue fluorescence. It melts at 213° C. and boils at 351° C. It is
insoluble in water, sparingly soluble in alcohol and ether, but readily
soluble in hot benzene. It unites with picric acid to form a picrate,
C14H10·C6H2(NO2)3·OH, which crystallizes in needles, melting at 138° C.
On exposure to sunlight a solution of anthracene in benzene or xylene
deposits para-anthracene (C14H10)2, which melts at 244° C. and passes
back into the ordinary form. Chlorine and bromine form both addition and
substitution products with anthracene; the addition product, anthracene
dichloride, C14H10Cl2, being formed when chlorine is passed into a cold
solution of anthracene in carbon bisulphide. On treatment with potash,
it forms the substitution product, monochlor-anthracene, C14H9Cl.
Nitro-anthracenes are not as yet known. The mono-oxyanthracenes
(anthrols), C14H9OH or

       /CH\
  C6H4<  | >C6H3OH
       \CH/

([alpha]) and ([beta]) resemble the phenols, whilst

       /C(OH)\
  C6H4<  |    >C6H4
       \CH   /

([gamma]) (anthranol) is a reduction product of anthraquinone.
[beta]-anthrol and anthranol give the corresponding amino compounds
(anthramines) when heated with ammonia.

Numerous sulphonic acids of anthracene are known, a monosulphonic acid
being obtained with dilute sulphuric acid, whilst concentrated sulphuric
acid produces mixtures of the anthracene disulphonic acids. By the
action of sodium amalgam on an alcoholic solution of anthracene, an
anthracene dihydride, C14H12, is obtained, whilst by the use of stronger
reducing agents, such as hydriodic acid and amorphous phosphorus,
hydrides of composition C14H16 and C14H24 are produced.

Methyl and phenyl anthracenes are known; phenyl anthranol (phthalidin)
being somewhat closely related to the phenolphthaleins (q.v.). Oxidizing
agents convert anthracene into anthraquinone (q.v.); the production of
this substance by oxidizing anthracene in glacial acetic acid solution,
with chromic acid, is the usual method employed for the estimation of
anthracene.