ANTHIM THE IBERIAN, a notable figure in the ecclesiastical history of
Rumania. A Georgian by birth, he came to Rumania early in the second
half of the 17th century, as a simple monk. He became bishop of Râmnicu
in 1705, and in 1708 archbishop of Walachia. Taking a leading part in
the political movements of the time, he came into conflict with the
newly appointed Greek hospodars, and was exiled to Rumelia. But on his
crossing the Danube in 1716 he was thrown into the water and drowned, as
it is alleged, at the instigation of the prince of Walachia. He was a
man of great talents and spoke and wrote many Oriental and European
languages. Though a foreigner, he soon acquired a thorough knowledge of
Rumanian, and was instrumental in helping to introduce that language
into the church as its official language. He was a master printer and an
artist of the first order. He cut the wood blocks for the books which he
printed in Tirgovishtea, Râmnicu, Snagov and Bucharest. He was also the
first to introduce Oriental founts of type into Rumania, and he printed
there the first Arabic missal for the Christians of the East (Râmnicu,
1702). He also trained Georgians in the art of printing, and cut the
type with which under his pupil Mihail Ishtvanovitch they printed the
first Georgian Gospels (Tiflis, 1709). A man of great oratorical power,
Anthim delivered a series of sermons (Didahii), and some of his pastoral
letters are models of style and of language as well as of exact and
beautiful printing. He also completed a whole _corpus_ of lectionaries,
missals, gospels, &c.

  See M. Gaster, _Chrestomathie roumaine_ (1881), and "Gesch. d.
  rumänischen Litteratur," in Grober, _Grundriss d. rom. Philologie_,
  vol. ii. (1899); and E. Picot, _Notice sur Anthim d'Ivir_ (Paris,
  1886).     (M. G.)