ANTHONY, SUSAN BROWNELL (1820-1906), American reformer, was born at
Adams, Massachusetts, on the 15th of February 1820, the daughter of
Quakers. Soon after her birth, her family moved to the state of New
York, and after 1845 she lived in Rochester. She received her early
education in a school maintained by her father for his own and
neighbours' children, and from the time she was seventeen until she was
thirty-two she taught in various schools. In the decade preceding the
outbreak of the Civil War she took a prominent part in the anti-slavery
and temperance movements in New York, organizing in 1852 the first
woman's state temperance society in America, and in 1856 becoming the
agent for New York state of the American Anti-slavery Society. After
1854 she devoted herself almost exclusively to the agitation for woman's
rights, and became recognized as one of the ablest and most zealous
advocates, both as a public speaker and as a writer, of the complete
legal equality of the two sexes. From 1868 to 1870 she was the
proprietor of a weekly paper, _The Revolution_, published in New York,
edited by Mrs Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and having for its motto, "The
true republic--men, their rights and nothing more; women, their rights
and nothing less." She was vice-president-at-large of the National
Woman's Suffrage Association from the date of its organization in 1869
until 1892, when she became president. For casting a vote in the
presidential election of 1872, as, she asserted, the Fourteenth
Amendment to the Federal Constitution entitled her to do, she was
arrested and fined $100, but she never paid the fine. In collaboration
with Mrs Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Mrs Matilda Joslyn Gage, and Mrs Ida
Husted Harper, she published _The History of Woman Suffrage_ (4 vols.,
New York, 1884-1887). She died at Rochester, New York, on the 13th of
March 1906.

  See Mrs Ida Husted Harper's _Life and Work of Susan B. Anthony_ (3
  vols., Indianapolis, 1898-1908).