ANTHEM, derived from the Gr. [Greek: antiphona], through the Saxon
_antefn_, a word which originally had the same meaning as antiphony
(q.v.). It is now, however, generally restricted to a form of church
music, particularly in the service of the Church of England, in which it
is appointed by the rubrics to follow the third collect at both morning
and evening prayer, "in choirs and places where they sing." It is just
as usual in this place to have an ordinary hymn as an anthem, which is a
more elaborate composition than the congregational hymns. Several
anthems are included in the English coronation service. The words are
selected from Holy Scripture or in some cases from the Liturgy, and the
music is generally more elaborate and varied than that of psalm or hymn
tunes. Anthems may be written for solo voices only, for the full choir,
or for both, and according to this distinction are called respectively
_Verse, Full_, and _Full with Verse_. Though the anthem of the Church of
England is analogous to the _motet_ of the Roman Catholic and Lutheran
Churches, both being written for a trained choir and not for the
congregation, it is as a musical form essentially English in its origin
and development. The English school of musicians has from the first
devoted its chief attention to this form, and scarcely a composer of any
note can be named who has not written several good anthems. Tallis, Tye,
Byrd, and Farrant in the 16th century; Orlando Gibbons, Blow, and
Purcell in the 17th, and Croft, Boyce, James Kent, James Nares, Benjamin
Cooke, and Samuel Arnold in the 18th were famous composers of anthems,
and in more recent times the names are too numerous to mention.