ANTHROPOLOGY (Gr. [Greek: anthropos] man, and [Greek: logos], theory or
science), the science which, in its strictest sense, has as its object
the study of man as a unit in the animal kingdom. It is distinguished
from ethnology, which is devoted to the study of man as a _racial_ unit,
and from ethnography, which deals with the _distribution_ of the races
formed by the aggregation of such units. To anthropology, however, in
its more general sense as the natural history of man, ethnology and
ethnography may both be considered to belong, being related as parts to
a whole.

Various other sciences, in conformity with the above definition, must be
regarded as subsidiary to anthropology, which yet hold their own
independent places in the field of knowledge. Thus anatomy and
physiology display the structure and functions of the human body, while
psychology investigates the operations of the human mind. Philology
deals with the general principles of language, as well as with the
relations between the languages of particular races and nations. Ethics
or moral science treats of man's duty or rules of conduct toward his
fellow-men. Sociology and the science of culture are concerned with the
origin and development of arts and sciences, opinions, beliefs, customs,
laws and institutions generally among mankind within historic time;
while beyond the historical limit the study is continued by inferences
from relics of early ages and remote districts, to interpret which is
the task of prehistoric archaeology and geology.

I. _Man's Place in Nature._--In 1843 Dr J.C. Prichard, who perhaps of
all others merits the title of founder of modern anthropology, wrote in
his _Natural History of Man_:--

  "The organized world presents no contrasts and resemblances more
  remarkable than those which we discover on comparing mankind with the
  inferior tribes. That creatures should exist so nearly approaching to
  each other in all the particulars of their physical structure, and yet
  differing so immeasurably in their endowments and capabilities, would
  be a fact hard to believe, if it were not manifest to our observation.
  The differences are everywhere striking: the resemblances are less
  obvious in the fulness of their extent, and they are never
  contemplated without wonder by those who, in the study of anatomy and
  physiology, are first made aware how near is man in his physical
  constitution to the brutes. In all the principles of his internal
  structure, in the composition and functions of his parts, man is but
  an animal. The lord of the earth, who contemplates the eternal order
  of the universe, and aspires to communion with its invisible Maker, is
  a being composed of the same materials, and framed on the same
  principles, as the creatures which he has tamed to be the servile
  instruments of his will, or slays for his daily food. The points of
  resemblance are innumerable; they extend to the most recondite
  arrangements of that mechanism which maintains instrumentally the
  physical life of the body, which brings forward its early development
  and admits, after a given period, its decay, and by means of which is
  prepared a succession of similar beings destined to perpetuate the
  race."

The acknowledgment of man's structural similarity with the
anthropomorphous species nearest approaching him, viz.: the higher or
anthropoid apes, had long before Prichard's day been made by Linnaeus,
who in his _Systema Naturae_ (1735) grouped them together as the highest
order of Mammalia, to which he gave the name of Primates. The
_Amoenitates Academicae_ (vol. vi., Leiden, 1764), published under the
auspices of Linnaeus, contains a remarkable picture which illustrates a
discourse by his disciple Hoppius, and is here reproduced (see Plate,
fig. 1). In this picture, which shows the crudeness of the zoological
notions current in the 18th century as to both men and apes, there are
set in a row four figures: (a) a recognizable orang-utan, sitting and
holding a staff; (b) a chimpanzee, absurdly humanized as to head, hands,
and feet; (c) a hairy woman, with a tail a foot long; (d) another woman,
more completely coated with hair. The great Swedish naturalist was
possibly justified in treating the two latter creatures as quasi-human,
for they seem to be grotesque exaggerations of such tailed and hairy
human beings as really, though rarely, occur, and are apt to be
exhibited as monstrosities (see Bastian and Hartmann, _Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie_, Index, "Geschwänzte Menschen"; Gould and Pile, _Anomalies
and Curiosities of Medicine_, 1897). To Linnaeus, however, they
represented normal anthropomorpha or man-like creatures, vouched for by
visitors to remote parts of the world. This opinion of the Swedish
naturalist seems to have been little noticed in Great Britain till it
was taken up by the learned but credulous Scottish judge, Lord Monboddo
(see his _Origin and Progress of Language_, 1774, &c.; _Antient
Metaphysics_, 1778). He had not heard of the tailed men till he met with
them in the work of Linnaeus, with whom he entered into correspondence,
with the result that he enlarged his range of mankind with races of
sub-human type. One was founded on the description by the Swedish sailor
Niklas Köping of the ferocious men with long tails inhabiting the
Nicobar Islands. Another comprised the orang-utans of Sumatra, who were
said to take men captive and set them to work as slaves. One of these
apes, it was related, served as a sailor on board a Jamaica ship, and
used to wait on the captain. These are stories which seem to carry their
own explanation. When the Nicobar Islands were taken over by the British
government two centuries later, the native warriors were still wearing
their peculiar loin-cloth hanging behind in a most tail-like manner
(E.H. Man, _Journal Anthropological Institute_, vol. xv. p. 442). As for
the story of the orang-utan cabin boy, this may even be verbally true,
it being borne in mind that in the Malay languages the term
_orang-utan_, "man of the forest," was originally used for inland forest
natives and other rude men, rather than for the _miyas_ apes to which it
has come to be generally applied by Europeans. The speculations as to
primitive man connected with these stories diverted the British public,
headed by Dr Johnson, who said that Monboddo was "as jealous of his tail
as a squirrel." Linnaeus's primarily zoological classification of man
did not, however, suit the philosophical opinion of the time, which
responded more readily to the systems represented by Buffon, and later
by Cuvier, in which the human mind and soul formed an impassable wall of
partition between him and other mammalia, so that the definition of
man's position in the animal world was treated as not belonging to
zoology, but to metaphysics and theology. It has to be borne in mind
that Linnaeus, plainly as he recognized the likeness of the higher
simian and the human types, does not seem to have entertained the
thought of accounting for this similarity by common descent. It
satisfied his mind to consider it as belonging to the system of nature,
as indeed remained the case with a greater anatomist of the following
century, Richard Owen. The present drawing, which under the authority of
Linnaeus shows an anthropomorphic series from which the normal type of
man, the _Homo sapiens_, is conspicuously absent, brings zoological
similarity into view without suggesting kinship to account for it. There
are few ideas more ingrained in ancient and low civilization than that
of relationship by descent between the lower animals and man. Savage and
barbaric religions recognize it, and the mythology of the world has
hardly a more universal theme. But in educated Europe such ideas had
long been superseded by the influence of theology and philosophy, with
which they seemed too incompatible. In the 19th century, however,
Lamarck's theory of the development of new species by habit and
circumstance led through Wallace and Darwin to the doctrines of the
hereditary transmission of acquired characters, the survival of the
fittest, and natural selection. Thenceforward it was impossible to
exclude a theory of descent of man from ancestral beings whom zoological
similarity connects also, though by lines of descent not at all clearly
defined, with ancestors of the anthropomorphic apes. In one form or
another such a theory of human descent has in our time become part of an
accepted framework of zoology, if not as a demonstrable truth, at any
rate as a working hypothesis which has no effective rival.

The new development from Linnaeus's zoological scheme which has thus
ensued appears in Huxley's diagram of simian and human skeletons (fig.
2, (a) gibbon; (b) orang; (c) chimpanzee; (d) gorilla; (e) man).
Evidently suggested by the Linnean picture, this is brought up to the
modern level of zoology, and continued on to man, forming an
introduction to his zoological history hardly to be surpassed. Some of
the main points it illustrates may be briefly stated here, the reader
being referred for further information to Huxley's _Essays_. In tracing
the osteological characters of apes and man through this series, the
general system of the skeletons, and the close correspondence in number
and arrangement of vertebrae and ribs, as well as in the teeth, go far
towards justifying the opinion of hereditary connexion. At the same
time, the comparison brings into view differences in human structure
adapted to man's pre-eminent mode of life, though hardly to be accounted
its chief causes. It may be seen how the arrangement of limbs suited for
going on all-fours belongs rather to the apes than to man, and walking
on the soles of the feet rather to man than the apes. The two modes of
progression overlap in human life, but the child's tendency when
learning is to rest on the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands,
unlike the apes, which support themselves on the sides of the feet and
the bent knuckles of the hands. With regard to climbing, the long
stretch of arm and the grasp with both hands and feet contribute to the
arboreal life of the apes, contrasting with what seem the mere remains
of the climbing habit to be found even among forest savages. On the
whole, man's locomotive limbs are not so much specialized to particular
purposes, as generalized into adaptation to many ends. As to the
mechanical conditions of the human body, the upright posture has always
been recognized as the chief. To it contributes the balance of the skull
on the cervical vertebrae, while the human form of the pelvis provides
the necessary support to the intestines in the standing attitude. The
marked curvature of the vertebral column, by breaking the shock to the
neck and head in running and leaping, likewise favours the erect
position. The lowest coccygeal vertebrae of man remain as a rudimentary
tail. While it is evident that high importance must be attached to the
adaptation of the human body to the life of diversified intelligence and
occupation he has to lead, this must not be treated as though it were
the principal element of the superiority of man, whose comparison with
all lower genera of mammals must be mainly directed to the intellectual
organ, the brain. Comparison of the brains of vertebrate animals (see
BRAIN) brings into view the immense difference between the small, smooth
brain of a fish or bird and the large and convoluted organ in man. In
man, both size and complexity contribute to the increased area of the
cortex or outer layer of the brain, which has been fully ascertained to
be the seat of the mysterious processes by which sensation furnishes the
groundwork of thought. Schäfer (_Textbook of Physiology_, vol. ii. p.
697) thus defines it: "The cerebral cortex is the seat of the
intellectual functions, of intelligent sensation or consciousness, of
ideation, of volition, and of memory."

The relations between man and ape are most readily stated in comparison
with the gorilla, as on the whole the most anthropomorphous ape. In the
general proportions of the body and limbs there is a marked difference
between the gorilla and man. The gorilla's brain-case is smaller, its
trunk larger, its lower limbs shorter, its upper limbs longer in
proportion than those of man. The differences between a gorilla's skull
and a man's are truly immense. In the gorilla, the face, formed largely
by the massive jaw-bones, predominates over the brain-case or cranium;
in the man these proportions are reversed. In man the occipital foramen,
through which passes the spinal cord, is placed just behind the centre
of the base of the skull, which is thus evenly balanced in the erect
posture, whereas the gorilla, which goes habitually on all fours, and
whose skull is inclined forward, in accordance with this posture has the
foramen farther back. In man the surface of the skull is comparatively
smooth, and the brow-ridges project but little, while in the gorilla
these ridges overhang the cavernous orbits like penthouse roofs. The
absolute capacity of the cranium of the gorilla is far less than that of
man; the smallest adult human cranium hardly measuring less than 63 cub.
in., while the largest gorilla cranium measured had a content of only
34½ cub. in. The largest proportional size of the facial bones, and the
great projection of the jaws, confer on the gorilla's skull its small
facial angle and brutal character, while its teeth differ from man's in
relative size and number of fangs. Comparing the lengths of the
extremities, it is seen that the gorilla's arm is of enormous length, in
fact about one-sixth longer than the spine, whereas a man's arm is
one-fifth shorter than the spine; both hand and foot are proportionally
much longer in the gorilla than in man; the leg does not so much differ.
The vertebral column of the gorilla differs from that of man in its
curvature and other characters, as also does the conformation of its
narrow pelvis. The hand of the gorilla corresponds essentially as to
bones and muscles with that of man, but is clumsier and heavier; its
thumb is "opposable" like a human thumb, that is, it can easily meet
with its extremity the extremities of the other fingers, thus possessing
a character which does much to make the human hand so admirable an
instrument; but the gorilla's thumb is proportionately shorter than
man's. The foot of the higher apes, though often spoken of as a hand, is
anatomically not such, but a prehensile foot. It has been argued by Sir
Richard Owen and others that the position of the great toe converts the
foot of the higher apes into a hand, an extremely important distinction
from man; but against this Professor T.H. Huxley maintained that it has
the characteristic structure of a foot with a very movable great toe.
The external unlikeness of the apes to man depends much on their
hairiness, but this and some other characteristics have no great
zoological value. No doubt the difference between man and the apes
depends, of all things, on the relative size and organization of the
brain. While similar as to their general arrangement to the human brain,
those of the higher apes, such as the chimpanzee, are much less complex
in their convolutions, as well as much less in both absolute and
relative weight--the weight of a gorilla's brain hardly exceeding 20
oz., and a man's brain hardly weighing less thin 32 oz., although the
gorilla is considerably the larger animal of the two.

These anatomical distinctions are undoubtedly of great moment, and it is
an interesting question whether they suffice to place man in a
zoological order by himself. It is plain that some eminent zoologists,
regarding man as absolutely differing as to mind and spirit from any
other animal, have had their discrimination of mere bodily differences
unconsciously sharpened, and have been led to give differences, such as
in the brain or even the foot of the apes and man, somewhat more
importance than if they had merely distinguished two species of apes.
Many naturalists hold the opinion that the anatomical differences which
separate the gorilla or chimpanzee from man are in some respects less
than those which separate these man-like apes from apes lower in the
scale. Yet all authorities class both the higher and lower apes in the
same order. This is Huxley's argument, some prominent points of which
are the following: As regards the proportion of limbs, the hylobates or
gibbon is as much longer in the arms than the gorilla as the gorilla is
than the man, while on the other hand, it is as much longer in the legs
than the man as the man is than the gorilla. As to the vertebral column
and pelvis, the lower apes differ from the gorilla as much as, or more
than, it differs from man. As to the capacity of the cranium, men differ
from one another so extremely that the largest known human skull holds
nearly twice the measure of the smallest, a larger proportion than that
in which man surpasses the gorilla; while, with proper allowance for
difference of size of the various species, it appears that some of the
lower apes fall nearly as much below the higher apes. The projection of
the muzzle, which gives the character of brutality to the gorilla as
distinguished from the man, is yet further exaggerated in the lemurs, as
is also the backward position of the occipital foramen. In characters of
such importance as the structure of the hand and foot, the lower apes
diverge extremely from the gorilla; thus the thumb ceases to be
opposable in the American monkeys, and in the marmosets is directed
forwards, and armed with a curved claw like the other digits, the great
toe in these latter being insignificant in proportion. The same argument
can be extended to other points of anatomical structure, and, what is of
more consequence, it appears true of the brain. A series of the apes,
arranged from lower to higher orders, shows gradations from a brain
little higher that that of a rat, to a brain like a small and imperfect
imitation of a man's; and the greatest structural break in the series
lies not between man and the man-like apes, but between the apes and
monkeys on one side, and the lemurs on the other. On these grounds
Huxley, restoring in principle the Linnean classification, desired to
include man in the order of _Primates_. This order he divided into seven
families: first, the _Anthropini_, consisting of man only; second, the
_Catarhini_ or Old World apes; third, the _Platyrhini_, all New World
apes, except the marmosets; fourth, the _Arclopithecini_, or marmosets;
fifth, the _Lemurini_, or lemurs; sixth and seventh, the _Cheiromyini_
and _Galeopithecini_.

It is in assigning to man his place in nature on psychological grounds
that the greater difficulty arises. Huxley acknowledged an immeasurable
and practically infinite divergence, ending in the present enormous
psychological gulf between ape and man. It is difficult to account for
this intellectual chasm as due to some minor structural difference. The
opinion is deeply rooted in modern as in ancient thought, that only a
distinctively human element of the highest import can account for the
severance between man and the highest animal below him. Differences in
the mechanical organs, such as the perfection of the human hand as an
instrument, or the adaptability of the human voice to the expression of
human thought, are indeed of great value. But they have not of
themselves such value, that to endow an ape with the hand and vocal
organs of a man would be likely to raise it through any large part of
the interval that now separates it from humanity. Much more is to be
said for the view that man's larger and more highly organized brain
accounts for those mental powers in which he so absolutely surpasses the
brutes.

The distinction does not seem to lie principally in the range and
delicacy of direct sensation, as may be judged from such well-known
facts as man's inferiority to the eagle in sight, or to the dog in
scent. At the same time, it seems that the human sensory organs may have
in various respects acuteness beyond those of other creatures. But,
beyond a doubt, man possesses, and in some way possesses by virtue of
his superior brain, a power of co-ordinating the impressions of his
senses, which enables him to understand the world he lives in, and by
understanding to use, resist, and even in a measure rule it. No human
art shows the nature of this human attribute more clearly than does
language. Man shares with the mammalia and birds the direct expression
of the feelings by emotional tones and interjectional cries; the
parrot's power of articulate utterance almost equals his own; and, by
association of ideas in some measure, some of the lower animals have
even learnt to recognize words he utters. But, to use words in
themselves unmeaning, as symbols by which to conduct and convey the
complex intellectual processes in which mental conceptions are
suggested, compared, combined, and even analysed, and new ones
created--this is a faculty which is scarcely to be traced in any lower
animal. The view that this, with other mental processes, is a function
of the brain, is remarkably corroborated by modern investigation of the
disease of aphasia, where the power of thinking remains, but the power
is lost of recalling the word corresponding to the thought, and this
mental defect is found to accompany a diseased state of a particular
locality of the brain (see APHASIA). This may stand among the most
perfect of the many evidences that, in Professor Bain's words, "the
brain is the principal, though not the sole organ of mind." As the
brains of the vertebrate animals form an ascending scale, more and more
approaching man's in their arrangement, the fact here finds its
explanation, that lower animals perform mental processes corresponding
in their nature to our own, though of generally less power and
complexity. The full evidence of this correspondence will be found in
such works as Brehm's _Thierleben_; and some of the salient points are
set forth by Charles Darwin, in the chapter on "Mental Powers," in his
_Descent of Man_. Such are the similar effects of terror on man and the
lower animals, causing the muscled to tremble, the heart to palpitate,
the sphincters to be relaxed, and the hair to stand on end. The
phenomena of memory, as to both persons and places, is strong in
animals, as is manifest by their recognition of their masters, and their
returning at once to habits of which, though disused for many years,
their brain has not lost the stored-up impressions. Such facts as that
dogs "hunt in dreams," make it likely that their minds are not only
sensible to actual events, present and past, but can, like our minds,
combine revived sensations into ideal scenes in which they are
actors,--that is to say, they have the faculty of imagination. As for
the reasoning powers in animals, the accounts of monkeys learning by
experience to break eggs carefully, and pick off bits of shell, so as
not to lose the contents, or of the way in which rats or martens after a
while can no longer be caught by the same kind of trap, with innumerable
similar facts, show in the plainest way that the reason of animals goes
so far as to form by new experience a new hypothesis of cause and effect
which will henceforth guide their actions. The employment of mechanical
instruments, of which instances of monkeys using sticks and stones
furnish the only rudimentary traces among the lower animals, is one of
the often-quoted distinctive powers of man. With this comes the whole
vast and ever-widening range of inventive and adaptive art, where the
uniform hereditary instinct of the cell-forming bee and the
nest-building bird is supplanted by multiform processes and
constructions, often at first rude and clumsy in comparison to those of
the lower instinct, but carried on by the faculty of improvement and new
invention into ever higher stages. "From the moment," writes A.R.
Wallace (_Natural Selection_), "when the first skin was used as a
covering, when the first rude spear was formed to assist in the chase,
when fire was first used to cook his food, when the first seed was sown
or shoot planted, a grand revolution was effected in nature, a
revolution which in all the previous ages of the earth's history had had
no parallel; for a being had arisen who was no longer necessarily
subject to change with the changing universe,--a being who was in some
degree superior to nature, inasmuch as he knew how to control and
regulate her action, and could keep himself in harmony with her, not by
a change in body, but by an advance of mind."

As to the lower instincts tending directly to self-preservation, it is
acknowledged on all hands that man has them in a less developed state
than other animals; in fact, the natural defencelessness of the human
being, and the long-continued care and teaching of the young by the
elders, are among the commonest themes of moral discourse. Parental
tenderness and care for the young are strongly marked among the lower
animals, though so inferior in scope and duration to the human
qualities; and the same may be said of the mutual forbearance and
defence which bind together in a rudimentary social bond the families
and herds of animals. Philosophy seeking knowledge for its own sake;
morality, manifested in the sense of truth, right, and virtue; and
religion, the belief in and communion with superhuman powers ruling and
pervading the universe, are human characters, of which it is instructive
to trace, if possible, the earliest symptoms in the lower animals, but
which can there show at most only faint and rudimentary signs of their
wondrous development in mankind. That the tracing of physical and even
intellectual continuity between the lower animals and our own race, does
not necessarily lead the anthropologist to lower the rank of man in the
scale of nature, may be shown by citing A.R. Wallace. Man, he considers,
is to be placed "apart, as not only the head and culminating point of
the grand series of organic nature, but as in some degree a new and
distinct order of being."

To regard the intellectual functions of the brain and nervous system as
alone to be considered in the psychological comparison of man with the
lower animals, is a view satisfactory to those thinkers who hold
materialistic views. According to this school, man is a machine, no
doubt the most complex and wonderfully adapted of all known machines,
but still neither more nor less than an instrument whose energy is
provided by force from without, and which, when set in action, performs
the various operations for which its structure fits it, namely, to live,
move, feel, and think. This view, however, always has been strongly
opposed by those who accept on theological grounds a spiritualistic
doctrine, or what is, perhaps, more usual, a theory which combines
spiritualism and materialism in the doctrine of a composite nature in
man, animal as to the body and in some measure as to the mind, spiritual
as to the soul. It may be useful, as an illustration of one opinion on
this subject, to continue here the citation of Dr Prichard's comparison
between man and the lower animals:--

  "If it be inquired in what the still more remarkable difference
  consists, it is by no means easy to reply. By some it will be said
  that man, while similar in the organization of his body to the lower
  tribes, is distinguished from them by the possession of an immaterial
  soul, a principle capable of conscious feeling, of intellect and
  thought. To many persons it will appear paradoxical to ascribe the
  endowment of a soul to the inferior tribes in the creation, yet it is
  difficult to discover a valid argument that limits the possession of
  an immaterial principle to man. The phenomena of feeling, of desire
  and aversion, of love and hatred, of fear and revenge, and the
  perception of external relations manifested in the life of brutes,
  imply, not only through the analogy which they display to the human
  faculties, but likewise from all that we can learn or conjecture of
  their particular nature, the superadded existence of a principle
  distinct from the mere mechanism of material bodies. That such a
  principle must exist in all beings capable of sensation, or of
  anything analogous to human passions and feelings, will hardly be
  denied by those who perceive the force of arguments which
  metaphysically demonstrate the immaterial nature of the mind. There
  may be no rational grounds for the ancient dogma that the souls of the
  lower animals were imperishable, like the soul of man: this is,
  however, a problem which we are not called upon to discuss; and we may
  venture to conjecture that there may be immaterial essences of divers
  kinds, and endowed with various attributes and capabilities. But the
  real nature of these unseen principles eludes our research: they are
  only known to us by their external manifestations. These
  manifestations are the various powers and capabilities, or rather the
  habitudes of action, which characterize the different orders of being,
  diversified according to their several destinations."

Dr Prichard here puts forward distinctly the time-honoured doctrine
which refers the mental faculties to the operation of the soul. The view
maintained by a distinguished comparative anatomist, Professor St George
Mivart, in his _Genesis of Species_, ch. xii., may fairly follow. "Man,
according to the old scholastic definition, is 'a rational animal'
(_animal rationale_), and his animality is distinct in nature from his
rationality, though inseparably joined, during life, in one common
personality. Man's animal body must have had a different source from
that of the spiritual soul which informs it, owing to the distinctness
of the two orders to which those two existences severally belong." The
two extracts just given, however, significant in themselves, fail to
render an account of the view of the human constitution which would
probably, among the theological and scholastic leaders of public
opinion, count the largest weight of adherence. According to this view,
not only life but thought are functions of the animal system, in which
man excels all other animals as to height of organization: but beyond
this, man embodies an immaterial and immortal spiritual principle which
no lower creature possesses, and which makes the resemblance of the apes
to him but a mocking simulance. To pronounce any absolute decision on
these conflicting doctrines is foreign to our present purpose, which is
to show that all of them count among their adherents men of high rank in
science.

II. _Origin of Man._--Opinion as to the genesis of man is divided
between the theories of creation and evolution. In both schools, the
ancient doctrine of the contemporaneous appearance on earth of all
species of animals having been abandoned under the positive evidence of
geology, it is admitted that the animal kingdom, past and present,
includes a vast series of successive forms, whose appearances and
disappearances have taken place at intervals during an immense lapse of
ages. The line of inquiry has thus been directed to ascertaining what
formative relation subsists among these species and genera, the last
link of the argument reaching to the relation between man and the lower
creatures preceding him in time. On both the theories here concerned it
would be admitted, in the words of Agassiz (_Principles of Zoology_, pp.
205-206), that "there is a manifest progress in the succession of beings
on the surface of the earth. This progress consists in an increasing
similarity of the living fauna, and, among the vertebrates especially,
in their increasing resemblance to man." Agassiz continues, however, in
terms characteristic of the creationist school: "But this connexion is
not the consequence of a direct lineage between the faunas of different
ages. There is nothing like parental descent connecting them. The fishes
of the Palaeozoic age are in no respect the ancestors of the reptiles of
the Secondary age, nor does man descend from the mammals which preceded
him in the Tertiary age. The link by which they are connected is of a
higher and immaterial nature; and their connexion is to be sought in the
view of the Creator himself, whose aim in forming the earth, in allowing
it to undergo the successive changes which geology has pointed out, and
in creating successively all the different types of animals which have
passed away, was to introduce man upon the surface of our globe. Man is
the end towards which all the animal creation has tended from the first
appearance of the first Palaeozoic fishes." The evolutionist, on the
contrary (see EVOLUTION), maintains that different successive species of
animals are in fact connected by parental descent, having become
modified in the course of successive generations. The result of Charles
Darwin's application of this theory to man may be given in his own words
(_Descent of Man_, part i. ch. 6):--

  "The Catarhine and Platyrhine monkeys agree in a multitude of
  characters, as is shown by their unquestionably belonging to one and
  the same order. The many characters which they possess in common can
  hardly have been independently acquired by so many distinct species;
  so that these characters must have been inherited. But an ancient form
  which possessed many characters common to the Catarhine and Platyrhine
  monkeys, and others in an intermediate condition, and some few perhaps
  distinct from those now present in either group, would undoubtedly
  have been ranked, if seen by a naturalist, as an ape or a monkey. And
  as man under a genealogical point of view belongs to the Catarhine or
  Old World stock, we must conclude, however much the conclusion may
  revolt our pride, that our early progenitors would have been properly
  thus designated. But we must not fall into the error of supposing that
  the early progenitor of the whole Simian stock, including man, was
  identical with, or even closely resembled, any existing ape or
  monkey."

The problem of the origin of man cannot be properly discussed apart from
the full problem of the origin of species. The homologies between man
and other animals which both schools try to account for; the explanation
of the intervals, with apparent want of intermediate forms, which seem
to the creationists so absolute a separation between species; the
evidence of useless "rudimentary organs," such as in man the external
shell of the ear, and the muscle which enables some individuals to
twitch their ears, which rudimentary parts the evolutionists claim to be
only explicable as relics of an earlier specific condition,--these,
which are the main points of the argument on the origin of man, belong
to general biology. The philosophical principles which underlie the two
theories stand for the most part in strong contrast, the theory of
evolution tending toward the supposition of ordinary causes, such as
"natural selection," producing modifications in species, whether by
gradual accumulation or more sudden leaps, while the theory of creation
has recourse to acts of supernatural intervention (see the duke of
Argyll, _Reign of Law_, ch. v.). St George Mivart (_Genesis of Species_)
propounded a theory of a natural evolution of man as to his body,
combined with a supernatural creation as to his soul; but this attempt
to meet the difficulties on both sides seems to have satisfied neither.

The wide acceptance of the Darwinian theory, as applied to the descent
of man, has naturally roused anticipation that geological research,
which provides evidence of the animal life of incalculably greater
antiquity, would furnish fossil remains of some comparatively recent
being intermediate between the anthropomorphic and the anthropic types.
This expectation has hardly been fulfilled, but of late years the notion
of a variety of the human race, geologically ancient, differing from any
known in historic times, and with characters approaching the simian, has
been supported by further discoveries. To bring this to the reader's
notice, top and side views of three skulls, as placed together in the
human development series in the Oxford University Museum, are
represented in the plate, for the purpose of showing the great size of
the orbital ridges, which the reader may contrast with his own by a
touch with his fingers on his forehead. The first (fig. 3) is the famous
Neanderthal skull from near Düsseldorf, described by Schaafhausen in
Müller's _Archiv_, 1858; Huxley in Lyell, _Antiquity of Man_, p. 86, and
in _Man's Place in Nature_. The second (fig. 4) is the skull from the
cavern of Spy in Belgium (de Puydt and Lohest, _Compte rendu du Congrès
de Namur_, 1886). The foreheads of these two skulls have an ape-like
form, obvious on comparison with the simian skulls of the gorilla and
other apes, and visible even in the small-scale figures in the Plate,
fig. 2. Among modern tribes of mankind the forehead of the Australian
aborigines makes the nearest approach to this type, as was pointed out
by Huxley. This brief description will serve to show the importance of a
later discovery. At Trinil, in Java, in an equatorial region where, if
anywhere, a being intermediate between the higher apes and man would
seem likely to be found, Dr Eugene Dubois in 1891-1892 excavated from a
bed, considered by him to be of Sivalik formation (Pliocene), a
thighbone which competent anatomists decide to be human, and a
remarkably depressed calvaria or skull-cap (fig. 5), bearing a certain
resemblance in its proportions to the corresponding part of the simian
skull. These remains were referred by their discoverer to an animal
intermediate between man and ape, to which he gave the name of
_Pithecanthropus erectus_ (q.v.), but the interesting discussions on the
subject have shown divergence of opinion among anatomists. At any rate,
classing the Trinil skull as human, it may be described as tending
towards the simian type more than any other known.

III. _Races of Mankind._--The classification of mankind into a number of
permanent varieties or races, rests on grounds which are within limits
not only obvious but definite. Whether from a popular or a scientific
point of view, it would be admitted that a Negro, a Chinese, and an
Australian belong to three such permanent varieties of men, all plainly
distinguishable from one another and from any European. Moreover, such a
division takes for granted the idea which is involved in the word race,
that each of these varieties is due to special ancestry, each race thus
representing an ancient breed or stock, however these breeds or stocks
may have had their origin. The anthropological classification of mankind
is thus zoological in its nature, like that of the varieties or species
of any other animal group, and the characters on which it is based are
in great measure physical, though intellectual and traditional
peculiarities, such as moral habit and language, furnish important aid.
Among the best-marked race-characters are the colour of the skin, eyes
and hair; and the structure and arrangement of the latter. Stature is by
no means a general criterion of race, and it would not, for instance, be
difficult to choose groups of Englishmen, Kaffirs, and North American
Indians, whose mean height should hardly differ. Yet in many cases it is
a valuable means of distinction, as between the tall Patagonians and the
stunted Fuegians, and even as a help in minuter problems, such as
separating the Teutonic and Celtic ancestry in the population of
England (see Beddoe, "Stature and Bulk of Man in the British Isles," in
_Mem. Anthrop. Soc. London_, vol. iii.) Proportions of the limbs,
compared in length with the trunk, have been claimed as constituting
peculiarities of African and American races; and other anatomical
points, such as the conformation of the pelvis, have speciality. But
inferences of this class have hardly attained to sufficient certainty
and generality to be set down in the form of rules. The conformation of
the skull is second only to the colour of the skin as a criterion for
the distinction of race; and the position of the jaws is recognized as
important, races being described as prognathous when the jaws project
far, as in the Australian or Negro, in contradistinction to the
orthognathous type, which is that of the ordinary well-shaped European
skull. On this distinction in great measure depends the celebrated
"facial angle," measured by Camper as a test of low and high races; but
this angle is objectionable as resulting partly from the development of
the forehead and partly from the position of the jaws. The capacity of
the cranium is estimated in cubic measure by filling it with sand, &c.,
with the general result that the civilized white man is found to have a
larger brain than the barbarian or savage. Classification of races on
cranial measurements has long been attempted by eminent anatomists, and
in certain cases great reliance may be placed on such measurements. Thus
the skulls of an Australian and a Negro would be generally distinguished
by their narrowness and the projection of the jaw from that of any
Englishman; but the Australian skull would usually differ perceptibly
from the Negroid in its upright sides and strong orbital ridges. The
relation of height to breadth may also furnish a valuable test; but it
is acknowledged by all experienced craniologists, that the shape of the
skull may vary so much within the same tribe, and even the same family,
that it must be used with extreme caution, and if possible only in
conjunction with other criteria of race. The general contour of the
face, in part dependent on the form of the skull, varies much in
different races, among whom it is loosely defined as oval,
lozenge-shaped, pentagonal, &c. Of particular features, some of the most
marked contrasts to European types are seen in the oblique Chinese eyes,
the broad-set Kamchadale cheeks, the pointed Arab chin, the snub Kirghiz
nose, the fleshy protuberant Negro lips, and the broad Kalmuck ear.
Taken altogether, the features have a typical character which popular
observation seizes with some degree of correctness, as in the
recognition of the Jewish countenance in a European city.

Were the race-characters constant in degree or even in kind, the
classification of races would be easy; but this is not so. Every
division of mankind presents in every character wide deviations from a
standard. Thus the Negro race, well marked as it may seem at the first
glance, proves on closer examination to include several shades of
complexion and features, in some districts varying far from the accepted
Negro type; while the examination of a series of native American tribes
shows that, notwithstanding their asserted uniformity of type, they
differ in stature, colour, features and proportions of skull. (See
Prichard, _Nat. Hist. of Man_; Waitz, _Anthropology_, part i. sec. 5.)
Detailed anthropological research, indeed, more and more justifies
Blumenbach's words, that "innumerable varieties of mankind run into one
another by insensible degrees." This state of things, due partly to
mixture and crossing of races, and partly to independent variation of
types, makes the attempt to arrange the whole human species within
exactly bounded divisions an apparently hopeless task. It does not
follow, however, that the attempt to distinguish special races should be
given up, for there at least exist several definable types, each of
which so far prevails in a certain population as to be taken as its
standard. L.A.J. Quetelet's plan of defining such types will probably
meet with general acceptance as the scientific method proper to this
branch of anthropology. It consists in the determination of the standard
or typical "mean man" (_homme moyen_) of a population, with reference to
any particular quality, such as stature, weight, complexion, &c. In the
case of stature, this would be done by measuring a sufficient number of
men, and counting how many of them belong to each height on the scale.
If it be thus ascertained, as it might be in an English district, that
the 5 ft. 7 in. men form the most numerous group, while the 5 ft. 6 in.
and 5 ft. 8 in. men are less in number, and the 5 ft. 5 in. and 5 ft. 9
in. still fewer, and so on until the extremely small number of extremely
short or tall individuals of 5 ft. or 7 ft. is reached, it will thus be
ascertained that the stature of the mean or typical man is to be taken
as 5 ft. 7 in. The method is thus that of selecting as the standard the
most numerous group, on both sides of which the groups decrease in
number as they vary in type. Such classification may show the existence
of two or more types, in a community, as, for instance, the population
of a Californian settlement made up of Whites and Chinese might show two
predominant groups (one of 5 ft. 8 in., the other of 5 ft. 4 in.)
corresponding to these two racial types. It need hardly be said that
this method of determining the mean type of a race, as being that of its
really existing and most numerous class, is altogether superior to the
mere calculation of an average, which may actually be represented by
comparatively few individuals, and those the exceptional ones. For
instance, the average stature of the mixed European and Chinese
population just referred to might be 5 ft. 6 in.--a worthless and indeed
misleading result. (For particulars of Quetelet's method, see his
_Physique sociale_ (1869), and _Anthropométrie_ (1871).)

Classifications of man have been numerous, and though, regarded as
systems, most of them are unsatisfactory, yet they have been of great
value in systematizing knowledge, and are all more or less based on
indisputable distinctions. J.F. Blumenbach's division, though published
as long ago as 1781, has had the greatest influence. He reckons five
races, viz. Caucasian, Mongolian, Ethiopian, American, Malay. The
ill-chosen name of Caucasian, invented by Blumenbach in allusion to a
South Caucasian skull of specially typical proportions, and applied by
him to the so-called white races, is still current; it brings into one
race peoples such as the Arabs and Swedes, although these are scarcely
less different than the Americans and Malays, who are set down as two
distinct races. Again, two of the best-marked varieties of mankind are
the Australians and the Bushmen, neither of whom, however, seems to have
a natural place in Blumenbach's series. The yet simpler classification
by Cuvier into Caucasian, Mongol and Negro corresponds in some measure
with a division by mere complexion into white, yellow and black races;
but neither this threefold division, nor the ancient classification into
Semitic, Hamitic and Japhetic nations can be regarded as separating the
human types either justly or sufficiently (see Prichard, _Natural
History of Man_, sec. 15; Waitz, _Anthropology_, vol. i. part i. sec.
5). Schemes which set up a larger number of distinct races, such as the
eleven of Pickering, the fifteen of Bory de St Vincent and the sixteen
of Desmoulins, have the advantage of finding niches for most
well-defined human varieties; but no modern naturalist would be likely
to adopt any one of these as it stands. In criticism of Pickering's
system, it is sufficient to point out that he divides the white nations
into two races, entitled the Arab and the Abyssinian (Pickering, _Races
of Man_, ch. i.). Agassiz, Nott, Crawfurd and others who have assumed a
much larger number of races or species of man, are not considered to
have satisfactorily defined a corresponding number of distinguishable
types. On the whole, Huxley's division probably approaches more nearly
than any other to such a tentative classification as may be accepted in
definition of the principal varieties of mankind, regarded from a
zoological point of view, though anthropologists may be disposed to
erect into separate races several of his widely-differing sub-races. He
distinguishes four principal types of mankind, the Australioid, Negroid,
Mongoloid and Xanthochroic ("fair whites"), adding a fifth variety, the
Melanochroic ("dark whites").

In determining whether the races of mankind are to be classed as
varieties of one species, it is important to decide whether every two
races can unite to produce fertile offspring. It is settled by
experience that the most numerous and well-known crossed races, such as
the Mulattos, descended from Europeans and Negroes--the Mestizos, from
Europeans and American indigenes--the Zambos, from these American
indigenes and Negroes, &c., are permanently fertile. They practically
constitute sub-races, with a general blending of the characters of the
two parents, and only differing from fully-established races in more or
less tendency to revert to one or other of the original types. It has
been argued, on the other hand, that not all such mixed breeds are
permanent, and especially that the cross between Europeans and
Australian indigenes is almost sterile; but this assertion, when
examined with the care demanded by its bearing on the general question
of hybridity, has distinctly broken down. On the whole, the general
evidence favours the opinion that any two races may combine to produce a
new sub-race, which again may combine with any other variety. Thus, if
the existence of a small number of distinct races of mankind be taken as
a starting-point, it is obvious that their crossing would produce an
indefinite number of secondary varieties, such as the population of the
world actually presents. The working out in detail of the problem, how
far the differences among complex nations, such as those of Europe, may
have been brought about by hybridity, is still, however, a task of
almost hopeless intricacy. Among the boldest attempts to account for
distinctly-marked populations as resulting from the intermixture of two
races, are Huxley's view that the Hottentots are hybrid between the
Bushmen and the Negroes, and his more important suggestion, that the
Melanochroic peoples of southern Europe are of mixed Xanthochroic and
Australioid stock.

The problem of ascertaining how the small number of races, distinct
enough to be called primary, can have assumed their different types, has
been for years the most disputed field of anthropology, the
battle-ground of the rival schools of monogenists and polygenists. The
one has claimed all mankind to be descended from one original stock, and
generally from a single pair; the other has contended for the several
primary races being separate species of independent origin. The great
problem of the monogenist theory is to explain by what course of
variation the so different races of man have arisen from a single stock.
In ancient times little difficulty was felt in this, authorities such as
Aristotle and Vitruvius seeing in climate and circumstance the natural
cause of racial differences, the Ethiopian having been blackened by the
tropical sun, &c. Later and closer observations, however, have shown
such influences to be, at any rate, far slighter in amount and slower in
operation than was once supposed. A. de Quatrefages brings forward
(_Unité de l'espèce humaine_) his strongest arguments for the
variability of races under change of climate, &c. (_action du milieu_),
instancing the asserted alteration in complexion, constitution and
character of Negroes in America, and Englishmen in America and
Australia. But although the reality of some such modification is not
disputed, especially as to stature and constitution, its amount is not
enough to upset the counter-proposition of the remarkable permanence of
type displayed by races, ages after they have been transported to
climates extremely different from that of their former home. Moreover,
physically different peoples, such as the Bushmen and Negroes in Africa,
show no signs of approximation under the influence of the same climate;
while, on the other hand, the coast tribes of Tierra del Fuego and
forest tribes of tropical Brazil continue to resemble one another, in
spite of extreme differences of climate and food. Darwin is moderate in
his estimation of the changes produced on races of man by climate and
mode of life within the range of history (_Descent of Man_, part i. ch.
4 and 7). The slightness and slowness of variation in human races having
become known, a great difficulty of the monogenist theory was seen to
lie in the apparent shortness of the Biblical chronology. Inasmuch as
several well-marked races of mankind, such as the Egyptian, Phoenician,
Ethiopian, &c., were much the same three or four thousand years ago as
now, their variation from a single stock in the course of any like
period could hardly be accounted for without a miracle. This difficulty
the polygenist theory escaped, and in consequence it gained ground.
Modern views have however tended to restore, though under a new aspect,
the doctrine of a single human stock. The fact that man has existed
during a vast period of time makes it more easy to assume the
continuance of very slow natural variation as having differentiated even
the white man and the Negro among the descendants of a common
progenitor. On the other hand it does not follow necessarily from a
theory of evolution of species that mankind must have descended from a
single stock, for the hypothesis of development admits of the argument,
that several simian species may have culminated in several races of man.
The general tendency of the development theory, however, is against
constituting separate species where the differences are moderate enough
to be accounted for as due to variation from a single type. Darwin's
summing-up of the evidence as to unity of type throughout the races of
mankind is as distinctly a monogenist argument as those of Blumenbach,
Prichard or Quatrefages--

  "Although the existing races of man differ in many respects, as in
  colour, hair, shape of skull, proportions of the body, &c., yet, if
  their whole organization be taken into consideration, they are found
  to resemble each other closely in a multitude of points. Many of these
  points are of so unimportant, or of so singular a nature, that it is
  extremely improbable that they should have been independently acquired
  by aboriginally distinct species or races. The same remark holds good
  with equal or greater force with respect to the numerous points of
  mental similarity between the most distinct races of man.... Now, when
  naturalists observe a close agreement in numerous small details of
  habits, tastes and dispositions between two or more domestic races, or
  between nearly allied natural forms, they use this fact as an argument
  that all are descended from a common progenitor who was thus endowed;
  and, consequently, that all should be classed under the same species.
  The same argument may be applied with much force to the races of
  man."--(Darwin, _Descent of Man_, part i. ch. 7.)

The main difficulty of the monogenist school has ever been to explain
how races which have remained comparatively fixed in type during the
long period of history, such as the white man and the Negro, should, in
even a far longer period, have passed by variation from a common
original. To meet this A.R. Wallace suggests that the remotely ancient
representatives of the human species, being as yet animals too low in
mind to have developed those arts of maintenance and social ordinances
by which man holds his own against influences from climate and
circumstance, were in their then wild state much more plastic than now
to external nature; so that "natural selection" and other causes met
with but feeble resistance in forming the permanent varieties or races
of man, whose complexion and structure still remained fixed in their
descendants (see Wallace, _Contributions to the Theory of Natural
Selection_, p. 319). On the whole, it may be asserted that the doctrine
of the unity of mankind stands on a firmer basis than in previous ages.
It would be premature to judge how far the problem of the origin of
races may be capable of exact solution; but the experience gained since
1871 countenances Darwin's prophecy that before long the dispute between
the monogenists and the polygenists would die a silent and unobserved
death.

IV. _Antiquity of Man._--Until the 10th century man's first appearance
on earth was treated on a historical basis as matter of record. It is
true that the schemes drawn up by chronologists differed widely, as was
natural, considering the variety and inconsistency of their documentary
data. On the whole, the scheme of Archbishop Usher, who computed that
the earth and man were created in 4004 B.C., was the most popular (see
CHRONOLOGY). It is no longer necessary, however, to discuss these
chronologies. Geology has made it manifest that our earth must have been
the seat of vegetable and animal life for an immense period of time;
while the first appearance of man, though comparatively recent, is
positively so remote, that an estimate between twenty and a hundred
thousand years may fairly be taken as a minimum. This geological claim
for a vast antiquity of the human race is supported by the similar
claims of prehistoric archaeology and the science of culture, the
evidence of all three departments of inquiry being intimately connected,
and in perfect harmony.

Human bones and objects of human manufacture have been found in such
geological relation to the remains of fossil species of elephant,
rhinoceros, hyena, bear, &c., as to lead to the distinct inference that
man already existed at a remote period in localities where these
mammalia are now and have long been extinct. The not quite conclusive
researches of Tournal and Christol in limestone caverns of the south of
France date back to 1828. About the same time P.C. Schmerling of Liége
was exploring the ossiferous caverns of the valley of the Meuse, and
satisfied himself that the men whose bones he found beneath the
stalagmite floors, together with bones cut and flints shaped by human
workmanship, had inhabited this Belgian district at the same time with
the cave-bear and several other extinct animals whose bones were
imbedded with them (_Recherches sur les ossements fossiles découverts
dans les cavernes de la province de Liége_ (Liége, 1833-1834)). This
evidence, however, met with little acceptance among scientific men. Nor,
at first, was more credit given to the discovery by M. Boucher de
Perthes, about 1841, of rude flint hatchets in a sand-bed containing
remains of mammoth and rhinoceros at Menchecourt near Abbeville, which
first find was followed by others in the same district (see Boucher de
Perthes, _De l'Industrie primitive, ou les arts à leur origine_ (1846);
_Antiquités celtiques et antédiluviennes_ (Paris, 1847), &c.). Between
1850 and 1860 French and English geologists were induced to examine into
the facts, and found irresistible the evidence that man existed and used
rude implements of chipped flint during the Quaternary or Drift period.
Further investigations were then made, and overlooked results of older
ones reviewed. In describing Kent's Cavern (q.v.) near Torquay, R.A.C.
Godwin-Austen had maintained, as early as 1840 (_Proc. Geo. Soc.
London_, vol. iii. p. 286), that the human bones and worked flints had
been deposited indiscriminately together with the remains of fossil
elephant, rhinoceros, &c. Certain caves and rock-shelters in the
province of Dordogne, in central France, were examined by a French and
an English archaeologist, Edouard Lartet and Henry Christy, the remains
discovered showing the former prevalence of the reindeer in this region,
at that time inhabited by savages, whose bone and stone implements
indicate a habit of life similar to that of the Eskimos. Moreover, the
co-existence of man with a fauna now extinct or confined to other
districts was brought to yet clearer demonstration by the discovery in
these caves of certain drawings and carvings of the animals done by the
ancient inhabitants themselves, such as a group of reindeer on a piece
of reindeer horn, and a sketch of a mammoth, showing the elephant's long
hair, on a piece of a mammoth's tusk from La Madeleine (Lartet and
Christy, _Reliquiae Aquitanicae_, ed. by T.R. Jones (London, 1865),
&c.).

This and other evidence (which is considered in more detail in the
article ARCHAEOLOGY) is now generally accepted by geologists as carrying
back the existence of man into the period of the post-glacial drift, in
what is now called the Quaternary period, an antiquity at least of tens
of thousands of years. Again, certain inferences have been tentatively
made from the depth of mud, earth, peat, &c., which has accumulated
above relics of human art imbedded in ancient times. Among these is the
argument from the numerous borings made in the alluvium of the Nile
valley to a depth of 60 ft., where down to the lowest level fragments of
burnt brick and pottery were always found, showing that people advanced
enough in the arts to bake brick and pottery have inhabited the valley
during the long period required for the Nile inundations to deposit 60
ft. of mud, at a rate probably not averaging more than a few inches in a
century. Another argument is that of Professor von Morlot, based on a
railway section through a conical accumulation of gravel and alluvium,
which the torrent of the Tinière has gradually built up where it enters
the Lake of Geneva near Villeneuve. Here three layers of vegetable soil
appear, proved by the objects imbedded in them to have been the
successive surface soils in two prehistoric periods and in the Roman
period, but now lying 4, 10 and 19 ft. underground. On this it is
computed that if 4 ft. of soil were formed in the 1500 years since the
Roman period, we must go 5000 years farther back for the date of the
earliest human inhabitants. Calculations of this kind, loose as they
are, deserve attention.

The interval between the Quaternary or Drift period and the period of
historical antiquity is to some extent bridged over by relics of various
intermediate civilizations, e.g. the Lake-dwellings (q.v.) of
Switzerland, mostly of the lower grades, and in some cases reaching back
to remote dates. And further evidence of man's antiquity is afforded by
the kitchen-middens or shell-heaps (q.v.), especially those in Denmark.
Danish peat-mosses again show the existence of man at a time when the
Scotch fir was abundant; at a later period the firs were succeeded by
oaks, which have again been almost superseded by beeches, a succession
of changes which indicate a considerable lapse of time.

Lastly, chronicles and documentary records, taken in connexion with
archaeological relics of the historical period, carry back into distant
ages the starting-point of actual history, behind which lies the
evidently vast period only known by inferences from the relations of
languages and the stages of development of civilization. The most recent
work of Egyptologists proves a systematic civilization to have existed
in the valley of the Nile at least 6000 to 7000 years ago (see
CHRONOLOGY).

It was formerly held that the early state of society was one of
comparatively high culture, and thus there was no hesitation in
assigning the origin of man to a time but little beyond the range of
historical records and monuments. But the researches of anthropologists
in recent years have proved that the civilization of man has been
gradually developed from an original stone-age culture, such as
characterizes modern savage life. To the 6000 years to which ancient
civilization dates back must be added a vast period during which the
knowledge, arts and institutions of such a civilization as that of
ancient Egypt attained the high level evidenced by the earliest records.
The evidence of comparative philology supports the necessity for an
enormous time allowance. Thus, Hebrew and Arabic are closely related
languages, neither of them the original of the other, but both sprung
from some parent language more ancient than either. When, therefore, the
Hebrew records have carried back to the most ancient admissible date the
existence of the Hebrew language, this date must have been long preceded
by that of the extinct parent language of the whole Semitic family;
while this again was no doubt the descendant of languages slowly shaping
themselves through ages into this peculiar type. Yet more striking is
the evidence of the Indo-European (formerly called Aryan) family of
languages. The Hindus, Medes, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Germans, Celts
and Slavs make their appearance at more or less remote dates as nations
separate in language as in history. Nevertheless, it is now acknowledged
that at some far remoter time, before these nations were divided from
the parent stock, and distributed over Asia and Europe, a single
barbaric people stood as physical and political representative of the
nascent Aryan race, speaking a now extinct Aryan language, from which,
by a series of modifications not to be estimated as possible within many
thousands of years, there arose languages which have been mutually
unintelligible since the dawn of history, and between which it was only
possible for an age of advanced philology to trace the fundamental
relationship.

From the combination of these considerations, it will be seen that the
farthest date to which documentary or other records extend is now
generally regarded by anthropologists as but the earliest distinctly
visible point of the historic period, beyond which stretches back a vast
indefinite series of prehistoric ages.

V. _Language._--In examining how the science of language bears on the
general problems of anthropology, it is not necessary to discuss at
length the critical questions which arise, the principal of which are
considered elsewhere (see LANGUAGE). Philology is especially appealed to
by anthropologists as contributing to the following lines of argument. A
primary mental similarity of all branches of the human race is evidenced
by their common faculty of speech, while at the same time secondary
diversities of race-character and history are marked by difference of
grammatical structure and of vocabularies. The existence of groups or
families of allied languages, each group being evidently descended from
a single language, affords one of the principal aids in classifying
nations and races. The adoption by one language of words originally
belonging to another, proving as it does the fact of intercourse between
two races, and even to some extent indicating the results of such
intercourse, affords a valuable clue through obscure regions of the
history of civilization.

Communication by gesture-signs, between persons unable to converse in
vocal language, is an effective system of expression common to all
mankind. Thus, the signs used to ask a deaf and dumb child about his
meals and lessons, or to communicate with a savage met in the desert
about game or enemies, belong to codes of gesture-signals identical in
principle, and to a great extent independent both of nationality and
education; there is even a natural syntax, or order of succession, in
such gesture-signs. To these gestures let there be added the use of the
interjectional cries, such as _oh! ugh! hey!_ and imitative sounds to
represent the cat's _mew_, the _click_ of a trigger, the _clap_ or
_thud_ of a blow, &c. The total result of this combination of gesture
and significant sound will be a general system of expression, imperfect
but serviceable, and naturally intelligible to all mankind without
distinction of race. Nor is such a system of communication only
theoretically conceivable; it is, and always has been, in practical
operation between people ignorant of one another's language, and as such
is largely used in the intercourse of savage tribes. It is true that to
some extent these means of utterance are common to the lower animals,
the power of expressing emotion by cries and tones extending far down in
the scale of animal life, while rudimentary gesture-signs are made by
various mammals and birds. Still, the lower animals make no approach to
the human system of natural utterance by gesture-signs and
emotional-imitative sounds, while the practical identity of this human
system among races physically so unlike as the Englishman and the native
of the Australian bush indicates extreme closeness of mental similarity
throughout the human species.

When, however, the Englishman and the Australian speak each in his
native tongue, only such words as belong to the interjectional and
imitative classes will be naturally intelligible, and as it were
instinctive to both. Thus the savage, uttering the sound _waow!_ as an
explanation of surprise and warning, might be answered by the white man
with the not less evidently significant _sh!_ of silence, and the two
speakers would be on common ground when the native indicated by the name
_bwirri_ his cudgel, flung _whirring_ through the air at a flock of
birds, or when the native described as a _jakkal-yakkal_ the bird called
by the foreigner a _cockatoo_. With these, and other very limited
classes of natural words, however, resemblance in vocabulary practically
ceases. The Australian and English languages each consist mainly of a
series of words having no apparent connexion with the ideas they
signify, and differing utterly; of course, accidental coincidences and
borrowed words must be excluded from such comparisons. It would be easy
to enumerate other languages of the world, such as Basque, Turkish,
Hebrew, Malay, Mexican, all devoid of traceable resemblance to
Australian and English, and to one another. There is, moreover, extreme
difference in the grammatical structure both of words and sentences in
various languages. The question then arises, how far the employment of
different vocabularies, and that to a great extent on different
grammatical principles, is compatible with similarity of the speakers'
minds, or how far does diversity of speech indicate diversity of mental
nature? The obvious answer is, that the power of using words as signs to
express thoughts with which their sound does not directly connect them,
in fact as arbitrary symbols, is the highest grade of the special human
faculty in language, the presence of which binds together all races of
mankind in substantial mental unity. The measure of this unity is, that
any child of any race can be brought up to speak the language of any
other race.

Under the present standard of evidence in comparing languages and
tracing allied groups to a common origin, the crude speculations as to a
single primeval language of mankind, which formerly occupied so much
attention, are acknowledged to be worthless. Increased knowledge and
accuracy of method have as yet only left the way open to the most widely
divergent suppositions. For all that known dialects prove to the
contrary, on the one hand, there may have been one primitive language,
from which the descendant languages have varied so widely, that neither
their words nor their formation now indicate their unity in long past
ages, while, on the other hand, the primitive tongues of mankind may
have been numerous, and the extreme unlikeness of such languages as
Basque, Chinese, Peruvian, Hottentot and Sanskrit may arise from
absolute independence of origin.

The language spoken by any tribe or nation is not of itself absolute
evidence as to its race-affinities. This is clearly shown in extreme
cases. Thus the Jews in Europe have almost lost the use of Hebrew, but
speak as their vernacular the language of their adopted nation, whatever
it may be; even the Jewish-German dialect, though consisting so largely
of Hebrew words, is philologically German, as any sentence shows: "_Ich
hab noch hoiom lo geachelt_," "I have not yet eaten to-day." The mixture
of the Israelites in Europe by marriage with other nations is probably
much greater than is acknowledged by them; yet, on the whole, the race
has been preserved with extraordinary strictness, as its physical
characteristics sufficiently show. Language thus here fails
conspicuously as a test of race and even of national history. Not much
less conclusive is the case of the predominantly Negro populations of
the West India Islands, who, nevertheless, speak as their native tongues
dialects of English or French, in which the number of intermingled
native African words is very scanty: "_Dem hitti netti na ini watra
bikasi dem de fisiman_," "They cast a net into the water, because they
were fishermen." (Surinam Negro-Eng.) "_Bef pas ca jamain lasse poter
cônes li_," "Le boeuf n'est jamais las de porter ses cornes." (Haitian
Negro-Fr.) If it be objected that the linguistic conditions of these two
races are more artificial than has been usual in the history of the
world, less extreme cases may be seen in countries where the ordinary
results of conquest-colonization have taken place. The Mestizos, who
form so large a fraction of the population of modern Mexico, numbering
several millions, afford a convenient test in this respect, inasmuch as
their intermediate complexion separates them from both their ancestral
races, the Spaniard, and the chocolate-brown indigenous Aztec or other
Mexican. The mother-tongue of this mixed race is Spanish, with an
infusion of Mexican words; and a large proportion cannot speak any
native dialect. In most or all nations of mankind, crossing or
intermarriage of races has thus taken place between the conquering
invader and the conquered native, so that the language spoken by the
nation may represent the results of conquest as much or more than of
ancestry. The supersession of the Celtic Cornish by English, and of the
Slavonic Old-Prussian by German, are but examples of a process which has
for untold ages been supplanting native dialects, whose very names have
mostly disappeared. On the other hand, the language of the warlike
invader or peaceful immigrant may yield, in a few generations, to the
tongue of the mass of the population, as the Northman's was replaced by
French, and modern German gives way to English in the United States.
Judging, then, by the extirpation and adoption of languages within the
range of history, it is obvious that to classify mankind into, races,
Aryan, Semitic, Turanian, Polynesian, Kaffir, &c., on the mere evidence
of language, is intrinsically unsound.

VI. _Development of Civilization._--The conditions of man at the lowest
and highest known levels of culture are separated by a vast interval;
but this interval is so nearly filled by known intermediate stages, that
the line of continuity between the lowest savagery and the highest
civilization is unbroken at any critical point.

An examination of the details of savage life shows not only that there
is an immeasurable difference between the rudest man and the highest
lower animal, but also that the least cultured savages have themselves
advanced far beyond the lowest intellectual and moral state at which
human tribes can be conceived as capable of existing, when placed under
favourable circumstances of warm climate, abundant food, and security
from too severe destructive influences. The Australian black-fellow or
the forest Indian of Brazil, who may be taken as examples of the lowest
modern savage, had, before contact with whites, attained to rudimentary
stages in many of the characteristic functions of civilized life. His
language, expressing thoughts by conventional articulate sounds, is the
same in essential principle as the most cultivated philosophic dialect,
only less exact and copious. His weapons, tools and other appliances
such as the hammer, hatchet, spear, knife, awl, thread, net, canoe, &c.,
are the evident rudimentary analogues of what still remains in use among
Europeans. His structures, such as the hut, fence, stockade, earthwork,
&c., may be poor and clumsy, but they are of the same nature as our own.
In the simple arts of broiling and roasting meat, the use of hides and
furs for covering, the plaiting of mats and baskets, the devices of
hunting, trapping and fishing, the pleasure taken in personal ornament,
the touches of artistic decoration on objects of daily use, the savage
differs in degree but not in kind from the civilized man. The domestic
and social affections, the kindly care of the young and the old, some
acknowledgment of marital and parental obligation, the duty of mutual
defence in the tribe, the authority of the elders, and general respect
to traditional custom as the regulator of life and duty, are more or
less well marked in every savage tribe which is not disorganized and
falling to pieces. Lastly, there is usually to be discerned amongst such
lower races a belief in unseen powers pervading the universe, this
belief shaping itself into an animistic or spiritualistic theology,
mostly resulting in some kind of worship. If, again, high savage or low
barbaric types be selected, as among the North American Indians,
Polynesians, and Kaffirs of South Africa, the same elements of culture
appear, but at a more advanced stage, namely, a more full and accurate
language, more knowledge of the laws of nature, more serviceable
implements, more perfect industrial processes, more definite and fixed
social order and frame of government, more systematic and philosophic
schemes of religion and a more elaborate and ceremonial worship. At
intervals new arts and ideas appear, such as agriculture and pasturage,
the manufacture of pottery, the use of metal implements and the device
of record and communication by picture writing. Along such stages of
improvement and invention the bridge is fairly made between savage and
barbaric culture; and this once attained to, the remainder of the series
of stages of civilization lies within the range of common knowledge.

The teaching of history, during the three to four thousand years of
which contemporary chronicles have been preserved, is that civilization
is gradually developed in the course of ages by enlargement and
increased precision of knowledge, invention and improvement of arts, and
the progression of social and political habits and institutions towards
general well-being. That processes of development similar to these were
in prehistoric times effective to raise culture from the savage to the
barbaric level, two considerations especially tend to prove. First,
there are numerous points in the culture even of rude races which are
not explicable otherwise than on the theory of development. Thus, though
difficult or superfluous arts may easily be lost, it is hard to imagine
the abandonment of contrivances of practical daily utility, where little
skill is required and materials are easily accessible. Had the
Australians or New Zealanders, for instance, ever possessed the potter's
art, they could hardly have forgotten it. The inference that these
tribes represent the stage of culture before the invention of pottery is
confirmed by the absence of buried fragments of pottery in the districts
they inhabit. The same races who were found making thread by the
laborious process of twisting with the hand, would hardly have disused,
if they had ever possessed, so simple a labour-saving device as the
spindle, which consists merely of a small stick weighted at one end; the
spindle may, accordingly, be regarded as an instrument invented
somewhere between the lowest and highest savage levels (Tylor, _Early
Hist. of Mankind_, p. 193). Again, many devices of civilization bear
unmistakable marks of derivation from a lower source; thus the ancient
Egyptian and Assyrian harps, which differ from ours in having no front
pillar, appear certainly to owe this remarkable defect to having grown
up through intermediate forms from the simple strung bow, the still used
type of the most primitive stringed instrument. In this way the history
of numeral words furnishes actual proof of that independent intellectual
progress among savage tribes which some writers have rashly denied. Such
words as _hand, hands, foot, man_, &c., are used as numerals signifying
5, 10, 15, 20, &c., among many savage and barbaric peoples; thus
Polynesian _lima_, i.e. "hand," means 5; Zulu _tatisitupa_, i.e. "taking
the thumb," means 6; Greenlandish _arfersanek-pingasut_, i.e. "on the
other foot three," means 18; Tamanac _tevin itoto_, i.e. "one man,"
means 20, &c., &c. The existence of such expressions demonstrates that
the people who use them had originally no spoken names for these
numbers, but once merely counted them by gesture on their fingers and
toes in low savage fashion, till they obtained higher numerals by the
inventive process of describing in words these counting-gestures.
Second, the process of "survival in culture" has caused the preservation
in each stage of society of phenomena, belonging to an earlier period,
but kept up by force of custom into the later, thus supplying evidence
of the modern condition being derived from the ancient. Thus the mitre
over an English bishop's coat-of-arms is a survival which indicates him
as the successor of bishops who actually wore mitres, while armorial
bearings themselves, and the whole craft of heraldry, are survivals
bearing record of a state of warfare and social order whence our present
state was by vast modification evolved. Evidence of this class, proving
the derivation of modern civilization, not only from ancient barbarism,
but beyond this, from primeval savagery, is immensely plentiful,
especially in rites and ceremonies, where the survival of ancient habits
is peculiarly favoured. Thus the modern Hindu, though using civilized
means for lighting his household fires, retains the savage "fire-drill"
for obtaining fire by friction of wood when what he considers pure or
sacred fire has to be produced for sacrificial purposes; while in Europe
into modern times the same primitive process has been kept up in
producing the sacred and magical "need-fire," which was lighted to
deliver cattle from a murrain. Again, the funeral offerings of food,
clothing, weapons, &c., to the dead are absolutely intelligible and
purposeful among savage races, who believe that the souls of the
departed are ethereal beings capable of consuming food, and of receiving
and using the souls or phantoms of any objects sacrificed for their use.
The primitive philosophy to which these conceptions belong has to a
great degree been discredited by modern science; yet the clear survivals
of such ancient and savage rites may still be seen in Europe, where the
Bretons leave the remains of the All Souls' supper on the table for the
ghosts of the dead kinsfolk to partake of, and Russian peasants set out
cakes for the ancestral manes on the ledge which supports the holy
pictures, and make dough ladders to assist the ghosts of the dead to
ascend out of their graves and start on their journey for the future
world; while other provision for the same spiritual journey is made when
the coin is still put in the hand of the corpse at an Irish wake. In
like manner magic still exists in the civilized world as a survival from
the savage and barbaric times to which it originally belongs, and in
which is found the natural source and proper home of utterly savage
practices still carried on by ignorant peasants in Great Britain, such
as taking omens from the cries of animals, or bewitching an enemy by
sticking full of pins and hanging up to shrivel in the smoke an image or
other object, that similar destruction may fall on the hated person
represented by the symbol (Tylor, _Primitive Culture_, ch. i., iii.,
iv., xi., xii.; _Early Hist. of Man_, ch. vi.).

The comparative science of civilization thus not only generalizes the
data of history, but supplements its information by laying down the
lines of development along which the lowest prehistoric culture has
gradually risen to the highest modern level. Among the most clearly
marked of these lines is that which follows the succession of the Stone,
Bronze, and Iron Ages (see ARCHAEOLOGY). The Stone Age represents the
early condition of mankind in general, and has remained in savage
districts up to modern times, while the introduction of metals need not
at once supersede the use of the old stone hatchets and arrows, which
have often long continued in dwindling survival by the side of the new
bronze and even iron ones. The Bronze Age had its most important place
among ancient nations of Asia and Europe, and among them was only
succeeded after many centuries by the Iron Age; while in other
districts, such as Polynesia and Central and South Africa, and America
(except Mexico and Peru), the native tribes were moved directly from the
Stone to the Iron Age without passing through the Bronze Age at all.
Although the three divisions of savage, barbaric, and civilized man do
not correspond at all perfectly with the Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages,
this classification of civilization has proved of extraordinary value in
arranging in their proper order of culture the nations of the Old World.

Another great line of progress has been followed by tribes passing from
the primitive state of the wild hunter, fisher and fruit-gatherer to
that of the settled tiller of the soil, for to this change of habit may
be plainly in great part traced the expansion of industrial arts and the
creation of higher social and political institutions. These, again, have
followed their proper lines along the course of time. Among such is the
immense legal development by which the primitive law of personal
vengeance passed gradually away, leaving but a few surviving relics in
the modern civilized world, and being replaced by the higher doctrine
that crime is an offence against society, to be repressed for the public
good. Another vast social change has been that from the patriarchal
condition, in which the unit is the family under the despotic rule of
its head, to the systems in which individuals make up a society whose
government is centralized in a chief or king. In the growth of
systematic civilization, the art of writing has had an influence so
intense, that of all tests to distinguish the barbaric from the
civilized state, none is so generally effective as this, whether they
have but the failing link with the past which mere memory furnishes, or
can have recourse to written records of past history and written
constitutions of present order. Lastly, still following the main lines
of human culture, the primitive germs of religious institutions have to
be traced in the childish faith and rude rites of savage life, and
thence followed in their expansion into the vast systems administered by
patriarchs and priests, henceforth taking under their charge the
precepts of morality, and enforcing them under divine sanction, while
also exercising in political life an authority beside or above the civil
law.

The state of culture reached by Quaternary man is evidenced by the stone
implements in the drift-gravels, and other relics of human art in the
cave deposits. His drawings on bone or tusk found in the caves show no
mean artistic power, as appears by the three specimens copied in the
Plate. That representing two deer (fig. 6) was found so early as 1852 in
the breccia of a limestone cave on the Charente, and its importance
recognized in a remarkable letter by Prosper Merimée, as at once
historically ancient and geologically modern (_Congrès d'anthropologie
et d'archéologie préhistoriques_, Copenhagen (1869), p. 128). The other
two are the famous mammoth from the cave of La Madeleine, on which the
woolly mane and huge tusks of _Elephas primigenius_ are boldly drawn
(fig. 7); and the group of man and horses (fig. 8). There has been found
one other contemporary portrait of man, where a hunter is shown stalking
an aurochs.

That the men of the Quaternary period knew the savage art of producing
fire by friction, and roasted the flesh on which they mainly subsisted,
is proved by the fragments of charcoal found in the cave deposits, where
also occur bone awls and needles, which indicate the wearing of skin
clothing, like that of the modern Australians and Fuegians. Their bone
lance-heads and dart-points were comparable to those of northern and
southern savages. Particular attention has to be given to the stone
implements used by these earliest known of mankind. The division of
tribes in the stone implement stage into two classes, the Palaeolithic
or Old Stone Age, and the Neolithic or New Stone Age, according to their
proficiency in this most important art furnishes in some respects the
best means of determining their rank in general culture.

In order to put this argument clearly before the reader, a few selected
implements are figured in the Plate. The group in fig. 9 contains tools
and weapons of the Neolithic period such as are dug up on European soil;
they are evident relics of ancient populations who used them till
replaced by metal. The stone hatchets are symmetrically shaped and edged
by grinding, while the cutting flakes, scrapers, spear and arrow heads
are of high finish. Direct knowledge of the tribes who made them is
scanty, but implements so similar in make and design having been in use
in North and South America until modern times, it may be assumed for
purposes of classification that the Neolithic peoples of the New World
were at a similar barbarous level in industrial arts, social
organization, moral and religious ideas. Such comparison, though needing
caution and reserve, at once proved of great value to anthropology.
When, however, there came to light from the drift-gravels and limestone
caves of Europe the Palaeolithic implements, of which some types are
shown in the group (fig. 10), the difficult problem presented itself,
what degree of general culture these rude implements belonged to. On
mere inspection, their rudeness, their unsuitability for being hafted,
and the absence of shaping and edging by the grindstone, mark their
inferiority to the Neolithic implements. Their immensely greater
antiquity was proved by their geological position and their association
with a long extinct fauna, and they were not, like the Neoliths,
recognizable as corresponding closely to the implements used by modern
tribes. There was at first a tendency to consider the Palaeoliths as the
work of men ruder than savages, if, indeed, their makers were to be
accounted human at all. Since then, however, the problem has passed into
a more manageable state. Stone implements, more or less approaching the
European Palaeolithic type, were found in Africa from Egypt southwards,
where in such parts as Somaliland and Cape Colony they lie about on the
ground, as though they had been the rough tools and weapons of the rude
inhabitants of the land at no very distant period. The group in fig. 11
in the Plate shows the usual Somaliland types. These facts tended to
remove the mystery from Palaeolithic man, though too little is known of
the ruder ancient tribes of Africa to furnish a definition of the state
of culture which might have co-existed with the use of Palaeolithic
implements. Information to this purpose, however, can now be furnished
from a more outlying region. This is Tasmania, where as in the adjacent
continent of Australia, the survival of marsupial animals indicates long
isolation from the rest of the world. Here, till far on into the 19th
century, the Englishmen could watch the natives striking off flakes of
stone, trimming them to convenient shape for grasping them in the hand,
and edging them by taking off successive chips on one face only. The
group in fig. 12 shows ordinary Tasmanian forms, two of them being finer
tools for scraping and grooving. (For further details reference may be
made to H. Ling Roth, _The Tasmanians_, (2nd ed., 1899); R. Brough
Smyth, _Aborigines of Victoria_ (1878), vol. ii.; _Papers and
Proceedings of Royal Society of Tasmania_; and papers by the present
writer in _Journal of the Anthropological Institute_.) The Tasmanians,
when they came in contact with the European explorers and settlers, were
not the broken outcasts they afterwards became. They were a savage
people, perhaps the lowest in culture of any known, but leading a
normal, self-supporting, and not unhappy life, which had probably
changed little during untold ages. The accounts, imperfect as they are,
which have been preserved of their arts, beliefs and habits, thus
present a picture of the arts, beliefs and habits of tribes whose place
in the Stone Age was a grade lower than that of Palaeolithic man of the
Quaternary period.

[Illustration: PLATE

FIG. 1. FIG. 2. FIG. 3 FIG. 4. FIG. 5. FIG. 6. FIG. 7. FIG. 8. FIG. 9.
FIG 10. FIG. 11. FIG. 12.]

The Tasmanian stone implements, figured in the Plate, show their own use
when it is noticed that the rude chipping forms a good hand-grip above,
and an effective edge for chopping, sawing, and cutting below. But the
absence of the long-shaped implements, so characteristic of the
Neolithic and Palaeolithic series, and serviceable as picks, hatchets,
and chisels, shows remarkable limitation in the mind of these savages,
who made a broad, hand-grasped knife their tool of all work to cut, saw,
and chop with. Their weapons were the wooden club or waddy notched to
the grasp, and spears of sticks, often crooked but well balanced, with
points sharpened by tool or fire, and sometimes jagged. No spear thrower
or bow and arrow was known. The Tasmanian savages were crafty warriors
and kangaroo-hunters, and the women climbed the highest trees by
notching, in quest of opossums. Shell-fish and crabs were taken, and
seals knocked on the head with clubs, but neither fish-hook nor
fishing-net was known, and indeed swimming fish were taboo as food. Meat
and vegetable food, such as fern-root, was broiled over the fire, but
boiling in a vessel was unknown. The fire was produced by the ordinary
savage fire-drill. Ignorant of agriculture, with no dwellings but rough
huts or breakwinds of sticks and bark, without dogs or other domestic
animals, these savages, until the coming of civilized man, roamed after
food within their tribal bounds. Logs and clumsy floats of bark and
grass enabled them to cross water under favourable circumstances. They
had clothing of skins rudely stitched together with bark thread, and
they were decorated with simple necklaces of kangaroo teeth, shells and
berries. Among their simple arts, plaiting and basket-work was one in
which they approached the civilized level. The pictorial art of the
Tasmanians was poor and childish, quite below that of the Palaeolithic
men of Europe. The Tasmanians spoke a fairly copious agglutinating
language, well marked as to parts of speech, syntax and inflexion.
Numeration was at a low level, based on counting fingers on one hand
only, so that the word for man (_puggana_) stood also for the number 5.
The religion of the Tasmanians, when cleared from ideas apparently
learnt from the whites, was a simple form of animism based on the shadow
(_warrawa_) being the soul or spirit. The strongest belief of the
natives was in the power of the ghosts of the dead, so that they carried
the bones of relatives to secure themselves from harm, and they fancied
the forest swarming with malignant demons. They placed weapons near the
grave for the dead friend's soul to use, and drove out disease from the
sick by exorcising the ghost which was supposed to have caused it. Of
greater special spirits of Nature we find something vaguely mentioned.
The earliest recorders of the native social life set down such features
as their previous experience of rude civilized life had made them judges
of. They notice the self-denying affection of the mothers, and the hard
treatment of the wives by the husbands, polygamy and the shifting
marriage unions. But when we meet with a casual remark as to the
tendency of the Tasmanians to take wives from other tribes than their
own, it seems likely that they had some custom of exogamy which the
foreigners did not understand. Meagre as is the information preserved of
the arts, thoughts, and customs of these survivors from the lower Stone
Age, it is of value as furnishing even a temporary and tentative means
of working out the development of culture on a basis not of conjecture
but of fact.

_Conclusion._--To-day anthropology is grappling with the heavy task of
systematizing the vast stores of knowledge to which the key was found by
Boucher de Perthes, by Lartet, Christy and their successors. There have
been recently no discoveries to rival in novelty those which followed
the exploration of the bone-caves and drift-gravels, and which effected
an instant revolution in all accepted theories of man's antiquity,
substituting for a chronology of centuries a vague computation of
hundreds of thousands of years. The existence of man in remote
geological time cannot now be questioned, but, despite much effort made
in likely localities, no bones, with the exception of those of the
much-discussed _Pithecanthropus_, have been found which can be regarded
as definitely bridging the gulf between man and the lower creation. It
seems as if anthropology had in this direction reached the limits of its
discoveries. Far different are the prospects in other directions where
the work of co-ordinating the material and facts collected promises to
throw much light on the history of civilization. Anthropological
researches undertaken all over the globe have shown the necessity of
abandoning the old theory that a similarity of customs and
superstitions, of arts and crafts, justifies the assumption of a remote
relationship, if not an identity of origin, between races. It is now
certain that there has ever been an inherent tendency in man, allowing
for difference of climate and material surroundings, to develop culture
by the same stages and in the same way. American man, for example, need
not necessarily owe the minutest portion of his mental, religious,
social or industrial development to remote contact with Asia or Europe,
though he were proved to possess identical usages. An example in point
is that of pyramid-building. No ethnical relationship can ever have
existed between the Aztecs and the Egyptians; yet each race developed
the idea of the pyramid tomb through that psychological similarity which
is as much a characteristic of the species man as is his physique.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--J.C. Prichard, _Natural History of Man_ (London, 1843);
  T.H. Huxley, _Man's Place in Nature_ (London, 1863); and "Geographical
  Distribution of Chief Modifications of Mankind," in _Journal
  Ethnological Society_ for 1870; E.B. Tylor, _Early History of Man_
  (London, 1865), _Primitive Culture_ (London, 1871), and _Anthropology_
  (London, 1881); A. de Quatrefages, _Histoire générale des races
  humaines_ (Paris, 1889), _Human Species_ (Eng. trans., 1879); Lord
  Avebury, _Prehistoric Times_ (1865, 6th ed. 1900) and _Origin of
  Civilization_ (1870, 6th ed. 1902), Theo. Waitz, _Anthropologie der
  Naturvolker_ (1859-1871), E.H. Haeckel, _Anthropogenie_ (Leipzig,
  1874-1891), Eng. trans., 1879; O. Peschel, _Volkerkunde_ (Leipzig,
  1874-1897); P. Topinard, _L'Anthropologie_ (Paris, 1876); _Éleménts
  d'anthropologie générale_ (Paris, 1885); D.G. Brinton, _Races and
  Peoples_ (1890); A.H. Keane, _Ethnology_ (1896), and _Man: Past and
  Present_ (1899); G. Sergi, _The Mediterranean Race_ (Eng. ed., 1889);
  F. Ratzel, _History of Mankind_ (Eng. trans., 1897); G. de Mortillet,
  _Le Préhistorique_ (Paris, 1882); A.C. Haddon, _Study of Man_ (1897);
  J. Deniker, _The Races of Man_ (London, 1900); W.Z. Ripley, _The Races
  of Europe_ (1900, with long bibliography); _The Journal of the
  Anthropological Institute of Great Britain_; _Revue d'anthropologie_
  (Paris); _Zeitschrift für Ethnologie_ (Berlin). See also
  bibliographies under separate ethnological headings (AUSTRALIA,
  AFRICA, ARABS, AMERICA, &c.).     (E. B. T.)