ANTINOMY (Gr. [Greek: anti], against, [Greek: nomos], law), literally,
the mutual incompatibility, real or apparent, of two laws. The term
acquired a special significance in the philosophy of Kant, who used it
to describe the contradictory results of applying to the universe of
pure thought the categories or criteria proper to the universe of
sensible perception (phenomena). These antinomies are four--two
mathematical, two dynamical--connected with (1) the limitation of the
universe in respect of space and time, (2) the theory that the whole
consists of indivisible atoms (whereas, in fact, none such exist), (3)
the problem of freedom in relation to universal causality, (4) the
existence of a universal being--about each of which pure reason
contradicts the empirical, as thesis and antithesis. Kant claimed to
solve these contradictions by saying, that in no case is the
contradiction real, however really it has been intended by the opposing
partisans, or must appear to the mind without critical enlightenment. It
is wrong, therefore, to impute to Kant, as is often done, the view that
human reason is, on ultimate subjects, at war with itself, in the sense
of being impelled by equally strong arguments towards alternatives
contradictory of each other. The difficulty arises from a confusion
between the spheres of phenomena and noumena. In fact no rational
cosmology is possible.

  See John Watson, _Selections from Kant_ (trans. Glasgow, 1897), pp.
  155 foll.; W. Windelband, _History of Philosophy_ (Eng. trans. 1893);
  H. Sidgwick, _Philos. of Kant_, lectures x. and xi. (Lond., 1905); F.
  Paulsen, _I. Kant_ (Eng. trans. 1902), pp. 216 foll.