ANTISTHENES (c. 444-365 B.C.), the founder of the Cynic school of
philosophy, was born at Athens of a Thracian mother, a fact which may
account for the extreme boldness of his attack on conventional thought.
In his youth he studied rhetoric under Gorgias, perhaps also under
Hippias and Prodicus. Gomperz suggests that he was originally in good
circumstances, but was reduced to poverty. However this may be, he came
under the influence of Socrates, and became a devoted pupil. So eager
was he to hear the words of Socrates that he used to walk daily from
Peiraeus to Athens, and persuaded his friends to accompany him. Filled
with enthusiasm for the Socratic idea of virtue, he founded a school of
his own in the Cynosarges, the hall of the bastards ([Greek: nothoi]).
Thither he attracted the poorer classes by the simplicity of his life
and teaching. He wore a cloak and carried a staff and a wallet, and this
costume became the uniform of his followers. Diogenes Laertius says that
his works filled ten volumes, but of these fragments only remain. His
favourite style seems to have been the dialogue, wherein we see the
effect of his early rhetorical training. Aristotle speaks of him as
uneducated and simple-minded, and Plato describes him as struggling in
vain with the difficulties of dialectic. His work represents one great
aspect of Socratic philosophy, and should be compared with the Cyrenaic
and Megarian doctrines.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Charles Chappuis, _Antisthène_ (Paris, 1854); A.
  Müller, _De Antisthenis cynici vita et scriptis_ (Dresden, 1860); T.
  Gomperz, _Greek Thinkers_ (Eng. trans., 1905), vol. ii. pp. 142 ff.,
  150 ff. For his philosophy see CYNICS, and for his pupils, Diogenes
  and Crates, see articles under these headings.