ANTI-SEMITISM. In the political struggles of the concluding quarter of
the 19th century an important part was played by a religious, political
and social agitation against the Jews, known as "Anti-Semitism." The
origins of this remarkable movement already threaten to become obscured
by legend. The Jews contend that anti-Semitism is a mere atavistic
revival of the Jew-hatred of the middle ages. The extreme section of the
anti-Semites, who have given the movement its quasi-scientific name,
declare that it is a racial struggle--an incident of the eternal
conflict between Europe and Asia--and that the anti-Semites are engaged
in an effort to prevent what is called the Aryan race from being
subjugated by a Semitic immigration, and to save Aryan ideals from being
modified by an alien and demoralizing oriental _Anschauung_. There is no
essential foundation for either of these contentions. Religious
prejudices reaching back to the dawn of history have been reawakened by
the anti-Semitic agitation, but they did not originate it, and they have
not entirely controlled it. The alleged racial divergence is, too, only
a linguistic hypothesis on the physical evidence of which
anthropologists are not agreed (Topinard, _Anthropologie_, p. 444;
Taylor, _Origins of Aryans_, cap. i.), and, even if it were proved, it
has existed in Europe for so many centuries, and so many ethnic
modifications have occurred on both sides, that it cannot be accepted as
a practical issue. It is true that the ethnographical histories of the
Jews and the nations of Europe have proceeded on widely diverging lines,
but these lines have more than once crossed each other and become
interlaced. Thus Aryan elements are at the beginning of both; European
morals have been ineradicably semitized by Christianity, and the Jews
have been Europeans for over a thousand years, during which their
character has been modified and in some respects transformed by the
ecclesiastical and civil polities of the nations among whom they have
made their permanent home. Anti-Semitism is then exclusively a question
of European politics, and its origin is to be found, not in the long
struggle between Europe and Asia, or between the Church and the
Synagogue, which filled so much of ancient and medieval history, but in
the social conditions resulting from the emancipation of the Jews in the
middle of the 19th century.

If the emancipated Jews were Europeans in virtue of the antiquity of
their western settlements, and of the character impressed upon them by
the circumstances of their European history, they none the less
presented the appearance of a strange people to their Gentile
fellow-countrymen. They had been secluded in their ghettos for
centuries, and had consequently acquired a physical and moral
physiognomy differentiating them in a measure from their former
oppressors. This peculiar physiognomy was, on its moral side, not
essentially Jewish or even Semitic. It was an advanced development of
the main attributes of civilized life, to which Christendom in its
transition from feudalism had as yet only imperfectly adapted itself.
The ghetto, which had been designed as a sort of quarantine to safeguard
Christendom against the Jewish heresy, had in fact proved a storage
chamber for a portion of the political and social forces which were
destined to sweep away the last traces of feudalism from central Europe.
In the ghetto, the pastoral Semite, who had been made a wanderer by the
destruction of his nationality, was steadily trained, through centuries,
to become an urban European, with all the parasitic activities of urban
economics, and all the democratic tendencies of occidental
industrialism. Excluded from the army, the land, the trade corporations
and the artisan gilds, this quondam oriental peasant was gradually
transformed into a commercial middleman and a practised dealer in money.
Oppressed by the Church, and persecuted by the State, his theocratic and
monarchical traditions lost their hold on his daily life, and he became
saturated with a passionate devotion to the ideals of democratic
politics. Finally, this former bucolic victim of Phoenician exploitation
had his wits preternaturally sharpened, partly by the stress of his
struggle for life, and partly by his being compelled in his urban
seclusion to seek for recreation in literary exercises, chiefly the
subtle dialectics of the Talmudists (Loeb, _Juif de l'histoire_;
Jellinek, _Der Jüdische Stamm_). Thus, the Jew who emerged from the
ghetto was no longer a Palestinian Semite, but an essentially modern
European, who differed from his Christian fellow-countrymen only in the
circumstances that his religion was of the older Semitic form, and that
his physical type had become sharply defined through a slightly more
rigid exclusiveness in the matter of marriages than that practised by
Protestants and Roman Catholics (Andree, _Volkskunde der Juden_, p. 58).

Unfortunately, these distinctive elements, though not very serious in
themselves, became strongly accentuated by concentration. Had it been
possible to distribute the emancipated Jews uniformly throughout
Christian society, as was the case with other emancipated religious
denominations, there would have been no revival of the Jewish question.
The Jews, however, through no fault of their own, belonged to only one
class in European society--the industrial _bourgeoisie_. Into that class
all their strength was thrown, and owing to their ghetto preparation,
they rapidly took a leading place in it, politically and socially. When
the mid-century revolutions made the _bourgeoisie_ the ruling power in
Europe, the semblance of a Hebrew domination presented itself. It was
the exaggeration of this apparent domination, not by the _bourgeoisie_
itself, but by its enemies among the vanquished reactionaries on the one
hand, and by the extreme Radicals on the other, which created modern
anti-Semitism as a political force.

  Germany.

The movement took its rise in Germany and Austria. Here the
concentration of the Jews in one class of the population was aggravated
by their excessive numbers. While in France the proportion to the total
population was, in the early'seventies, 0.14%, and in Italy, 0.12%, it
was 1.22% in Germany, and 3.85% in Austria-Hungary; Berlin had 4.36% of
Jews, and Vienna 6.62% (Andree, _Volkskunde_, pp. 287, 291, 294, 295).
The activity of the Jews consequently manifested itself in a far more
intense form in these countries than elsewhere. This was apparent even
before the emancipations of 1848. Towards the middle of the 18th
century, a limited number of wealthy Jews had been tolerated as
_Schutz-Juden_ outside the ghettos, and their sons, educated as Germans
under the influence of Moses Mendelssohn and his school (see JEWS),
supplied a majority of the leading spirits of the revolutionary
agitation. To this period belong the formidable names of Ludwig Börne
(1786-1837), Heinrich Heine (1799-1854), Edward Ganz (1798-1839),
Gabriel Riesser (1806-1863), Ferdinand Lassalle (1825-1864), Karl Marx
(1818-1883), Moses Hess (1812-1875), Ignatz Kuranda (1811-1884), and
Johann Jacobi (1805-1877). When the revolution was completed, and the
Jews entered in a body the national life of Germany and Austria, they
sustained this high average in all the intellectual branches of
middle-class activity. Here again, owing to the accidents of their
history, a further concentration became apparent. Their activity was
almost exclusively intellectual. The bulk of them flocked to the
financial and the distributive (as distinct from the productive) fields
of industry to which they had been confined in the ghettos. The
sharpened faculties of the younger generation at the same time carried
everything before them in the schools, with the result that they soon
crowded the professions, especially medicine, law and journalism
(Nossig, _Statistik des Jüd. Stammes_, pp. 33-37; Jacobs, _Jew.
Statistics_, pp. 41-69). Thus the "Semitic domination," as it was
afterwards called, became every day more strongly accentuated. If it was
a long time in exciting resentment and jealousy, the reason was that it
was in no sense alien to the new conditions of the national life. The
competition was a fair one. The Jews might be more successful than their
Christian fellow-citizens, but it was in virtue of qualities which
complied with the national standards of conduct. They were as
law-abiding and patriotic as they were intelligent. Crime among them was
far below the average (Nossig, p. 31). Their complete assimilation of
the national spirit was brilliantly illustrated by the achievements in
German literature, art and science of such men as Heinrich Heine and
Berthold Auerbach (1812-1882), Felix Mendelssohn (-Bartholdy)
(1809-1847), and Jacob Meyerbeer (1794-1864), Karl Gustav Jacobi the
mathematician (1804-1851), Gabriel Gustav Valentin the physiologist
(1810-1883), and Moritz Lazarus (1824-1903) and Heymann Steinthal
(1823-1899) the national psychologists. In politics, too, Edward Lasker
(1829-1884) and Ludwig Bamberger (1823-1899) had shown how Jews could
put their country before party, when, at the turning-point of German
imperial history in 1866, they led the secession from the
_Fortschritts-Partei_ and founded the National Liberal party, which
enabled Prince Bismarck to accomplish German unity. Even their
financiers were not behind their Christian fellow-citizens in
patriotism. Prince Bismarck himself confessed that the money for
carrying on the 1866 campaign was obtained from the Jewish banker
Bleichroeder, in face of the refusal of the money-market to support the
war. Hence the voice of the old Jew-hatred--for in a weak way it was
still occasionally heard in obscurantist corners--was shamed into
silence, and it was only in the European twilight--in Russia and
Rumania--and in lands where medievalism still lingered, such as northern
Africa and Persia, that oppression and persecution continued to dog the
steps of the Jews.

The signal for the change came in 1873, and was given unconsciously by
one of the most distinguished Jews of his time, Edward Lasker, the
gifted lieutenant of Bennigsen in the leadership of the National Liberal
party. The unification of Germany in 1870, and the rapid payment of the
enormous French war indemnity, had given an unprecedented impulse to
industrial and financial activity throughout the empire. Money became
cheap and speculation universal. A company mania set in which was
favoured by the government, who granted railway and other concessions
with a prodigal hand. The inevitable result of this state of things was
first indicated by Jewish politicians and economists. On the 14th of
January 1873, Edward Lasker called the attention of the Prussian diet to
the dangers of the situation, while his colleague, Ludwig Bamberger, in
an able article in the _Preussischen Jahrbücher_, condemned the policy
which had permitted the milliards to glut the country instead of being
paid on a plan which would have facilitated their gradual digestion by
the economic machinery of the nation. Deeply impressed by the gravity of
the impending crisis, Lasker instituted a searching inquiry, with the
result that he discovered a series of grave company scandals in which
financial promoters and aristocratic directors were chiefly involved.
Undeterred by the fact that the leading spirit in these abuses, Bethel
Henry Strousberg (1823-1884), was a Jew, Lasker presented the results of
his inquiry to the diet on the 7th of February 1873, in a speech of
great power and full of sensational disclosures. The dramatic results of
this speech need not be dwelt upon here (for details see Blum, _Das
deutsche Reich zur Zelt Bismarcks_, pp. 153-181). It must suffice to say
that in the following May the great Vienna "Krach" occurred, and the
colossal bubble of speculation burst, bringing with it all the ruin
foretold by Lasker and Bamberger. From the position occupied by the Jews
in the commercial class, and especially in the financial section of that
class, it was inevitable that a considerable number of them should
figure in the scandals which followed. At this moment an obscure Hamburg
journalist, Wilhelm Marr, who as far back as 1862 had printed a
still-born tract against the Jews (_Judenspiegel_), published a
sensational pamphlet entitled _Der Sieg des Judenthums uber das
Germanthum_ ("The Victory of Judaism over Germanism"). The book fell
upon fruitful soil. It applied to the nascent controversy a theory of
nationality which, under the great sponsorship of Hegel, had seized on
the minds of the German youth, and to which the stirring events of 1870
had already given a deep practical significance. The state, according to
the Hegelians, should be rational, and the nation should be a unit
comprising individuals speaking the same language and of the same racial
origin. Heterogeneous elements might be absorbed, but if they could not
be reduced to the national type they should be eliminated. This was the
pseudo-scientific note of the new anti-Semitism, the theory which
differentiated it from the old religious Jew-hatred and sought to give
it a rational place in modern thought. Marr's pamphlet, which reviewed
the facts of the Jewish social concentration without noticing their
essentially transitional character, proved the pioneer of this teaching.
It was, however, in the passions of party politics that the new crusade
found its chief sources of vitality. The enemies of the _bourgeoisie_ at
once saw that the movement was calculated to discredit and weaken the
school of Manchester Liberalism, then in the ascendant. Agrarian
capitalism, which had been dethroned by industrial capitalism in 1848,
and had burnt its fingers in 1873, seized the opportunity of paying off
old scores. The clericals, smarting under the _Kutlturkampj_, which was
supported by the whole body of Jewish liberalism, joined eagerly in the
new cry. In 1876 another sensational pamphlet was published, Otto
Glogau's _Die Börsen und Grundergeschwindel in Berlin_ ("The Bourses and
the Company Swindles in Berlin"), dealing in detail with the Jewish
participation in the scandals first revealed by Lasker. The agitation
gradually swelled, its growth being helped by the sensitiveness and
_cacoëthes scribendi_ of the Jews themselves, who contributed two
pamphlets and a much larger proportion of newspaper articles for every
one supplied by their opponents (Jacobs. _Bibliog. Jew. Question_, p.
xi.). Up to 1879, however, it was more of a literary than a political
agitation, and was generally regarded only as an ephemeral craze or a
passing spasm of popular passion.

Towards the end of 1879 it spread with sudden fury over the whole of
Germany. This outburst, at a moment when no new financial scandals or
other illustrations of Semitic demoralization and domination were before
the public, has never been fully explained. It is impossible to doubt,
however, that the secret springs of the new agitation were more or less
directly supplied by Prince Bismarck himself. Since 1877 the relations
between the chancellor and the National Liberals had gradually become
strained. The deficit in the budget had compelled the government to
think of new taxes, and in order to carry them through the Reichstag the
support of the National Liberals had been solicited. Until then the
National Liberals had faithfully supported the chancellor in nursing the
consolidation of the new empire, but the great dream of its leaders,
especially of Lasker and Bamberger, who had learnt their politics in
England, was to obtain a constitutional and economic _régime_ similar to
that of the British Isles. The organization of German unity was now
completed, and they regarded the new overtures of Prince Bismarck as an
opportunity for pressing their constitutional demands. These were
refused, the Reichstag was dissolved and Prince Bismarck boldly came
forward with a new fiscal policy, a combination of protection and state
socialism. Lasker and Bamberger thereupon led a powerful secession of
National Liberals into opposition, and the chancellor was compelled to
seek a new majority among the ultra-Conservatives and the Roman Catholic
Centre. This was the beginning of the famous "journey to Canossa."
Bismarck did not hide his mortification. He began to recognize in
anti-Semitism a means of "dishing" the Judaized liberals, and to his
creatures who assisted him in his press campaigns he dropped significant
hints in this sense (Busch, _Bismarck_, ii. 453-454, iii. 16). He even
spoke of a new _Kulturkampf_ against the Jews (_ibid_. ii. p. 484). How
these hints were acted upon has not been revealed, but it is
sufficiently instructive to notice that the final breach with the
National Liberals took place in July 1879, and that it was immediately
followed by a violent revival of the anti-Semitic agitation. Marr's
pamphlet was reprinted, and within a few months ran through nine further
editions. The historian Treitschke gave the sanction of his great name
to the movement. The Conservative and Ultramontane press rang with the
sins of the Jews. In October an anti-Semitic league was founded in
Berlin and Dresden (for statutes of the league see _Nineteenth Century_,
February 1881, p. 344).

The leadership of the agitation was now definitely assumed by a man who
combined with social influence, oratorical power and inexhaustible
energy, a definite scheme of social regeneration and an organization for
carrying it out. This man was Adolf Stöcker (b. 1835), one of the court
preachers. He had embraced the doctrines of Christian socialism which
the Roman Catholics, under the guidance of Archbishop Ketteler, had
adopted from the teachings of the Jew Lassalle (Nitti, _Catholic
Socialism_, pp. 94-96, 122, 127), and he had formed a society called
"The Christian Social Working-man's Union." He was also a conspicuous
member of the Prussian diet, where he sat and voted with the
Conservatives. He found himself in strong sympathy with Prince
Bismarck's new economic policy, which, although also of Lassallian
origin (Kohut, _Ferdinand Lassalle_, pp. 144 et seq.), was claimed by
its author as being essentially Christian (Busch, p. 483). Under his
auspices the years 1880-1881 became a period of bitter and scandalous
conflict with the Jews. The Conservatives supported him, partly to
satisfy their old grudges against the Liberal _bourgeoisie_ and partly
because Christian Socialism, with its anti-Semitic appeal to ignorant
prejudice, was likely to weaken the hold of the Social Democrats on the
lower classes. The Lutheran clergy followed suit, in order to prevent
the Roman Catholics from obtaining a monopoly of Christian Socialism,
while the Ultramontanes readily adopted anti-Semitism, partly to
maintain their monopoly, and partly to avenge themselves on the Jewish
and Liberal supporters of the _Kulturkampf_. In this way a formidable
body of public opinion was recruited for the anti-Semites. Violent
debates took place in the Prussian diet. A petition to exclude the Jews
from the national schools and universities and to disable them from
holding public appointments was presented to Prince Bismarck. Jews were
boycotted and insulted. Duels between Jews and anti-Semites, many of
them fatal, became of daily occurrence. Even unruly demonstrations and
street riots were reported. Pamphlets attacking every phase and aspect
of Jewish life streamed by the hundred from the printing-press. On their
side the Jews did not want for friends, and it was owing to the strong
attitude adopted by the Liberals that the agitation failed to secure
legislative fruition. The crown prince (afterwards Emperor Frederick)
and crown princess boldly set themselves at the head of the party of
protest. The crown prince publicly declared that the agitation was "a
shame and a disgrace to Germany." A manifesto denouncing the movement as
a blot on German culture, a danger to German unity and a flagrant
injustice to the Jews themselves, was signed by a long list of
illustrious men, including Herr von Forckenbeck, Professors Mommsen,
Gneist, Droysen, Virchow, and Dr Werner Siemens (_Times_, November 18,
1880). During the Reichstag elections of 1881 the agitation played an
active part, but without much effect, although Stöcker was elected. This
was due to the fact that the great Conservative parties, so far as
their political organizations were concerned, still remained chary of
publicly identifying themselves with a movement which, in its essence,
was of socialistic tendency. Hence the electoral returns of that year
supplied no sure guide to the strength of anti-Semitic opinion among the
German people.

The first severe blow suffered by the German anti-Semites was in 1881,
when, to the indignation of the whole civilized world, the barbarous
riots against the Jews in Russia and the revival of the medieval Blood
Accusation in Hungary (see _infra_) illustrated the liability of
unreasoning mobs to carry into violent practice the incendiary doctrines
of the new Jew-haters. From this blow anti-Semitism might have recovered
had it not been for the divisions and scandals in its own ranks, and the
artificial forms it subsequently assumed through factitious alliances
with political parties bent less on persecuting the Jews than on
profiting by the anti-Jewish agitation. The divisions showed themselves
at the first attempt to form a political party on an anti-Semitic basis.
Imperceptibly the agitators had grouped themselves into two classes,
economic and ethnological anti-Semites. The impracticable racial views
of Marr and Treitschke had not found favour with Stöcker and the
Christian Socialists. They were disposed to leave the Jews in peace so
long as they behaved themselves properly, and although they carried on
their agitation against Jewish malpractices in a comprehensive form
which seemed superficially to identify them with the root-and-branch
anti-Semites, they were in reality not inclined to accept the racial
theory with its scheme of revived Jewish disabilities (Huret, _La
Question Sociale_--interview with Stöcker). This feeling was
strengthened by a tendency on the part of an extreme wing of the racial
anti-Semites to extend their campaign against Judaism to its offspring,
Christianity. In 1879 Professor Sepp, arguing that Jesus was of no human
race, had proposed that Christianity should reject the Hebrew Scriptures
and seek a fresh historical basis in the cuneiform inscriptions. Later
Dr Eugen Dübring, in several brochures, notably _Die Judenfrage als
Frage des Rassencharakters_ (1881, 5th ed. Berlin, 1901), had attacked
Christianity as a manifestation of the Semitic spirit which was not
compatible with the theological and ethical conceptions of the
Scandinavian peoples. The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche had also
adopted the same view, without noticing that it was a _reductio ad
absurdum_ of the whole agitation, in his _Menschliches,
Allzumenschliches_ (1878), _Jenseits von Gut und Böse_ (1886),
_Genealogie der Moral_ (1887). With these tendencies the Christian
Socialists could have no sympathy, and the consequence was that when in
March 1881 a political organization of anti-Semitism was attempted, two
rival bodies were created, the "Deutsche Volksverein," under the
Conservative auspices of Herr Liebermann von Sonnenberg (b. 1848) and
Herr Förster, and the "Sociale Reichsverein," led by the racial and
Radical anti-Semites, Ernst Henrici (b. 1854) and Otto Böckel (b. 1859).
In 1886, at an anti-Semitic congress held at Cassel a reunion was
effected under the name of the "Deutsche antisemitische Verein," but
this only lasted three years. In June 1889 the anti-Semitic Christian
Socialists under Stöcker again seceded.

Meanwhile racial anti-Semitism with its wholesale radical proposals had
been making considerable progress among the ignorant lower classes. It
adapted itself better to popular passions and inherited prejudice than
the more academic conceptions of the Christian Socialists. The latter,
too, were largely Conservatives, and their points of contact with the
proletariat were at best artificial. Among the Hessian peasantry the
inflammatory appeals of Böckel secured many adherents. This paved the
way for a new anti-Semitic leader, Herrmann Ahlwardt (b. 1846), who,
towards the end of the 'eighties, eclipsed all the other anti-Semites by
the sensationalism and violence with which he prosecuted the campaign.
Ahlwardt was a person of evil notoriety. He was loaded with debt. In the
Manché decoration scandals it was proved that he had acted first as a
corrupt intermediary and afterwards as the betrayer of his confederates.
His anti-Semitism was adopted originally as a means of _chantage_, and
it was only when it failed to yield profit in this form that he came out
boldly as an agitator. The wildness, unscrupulousness, and
full-bloodedness of his propaganda enchanted the mob, and he bid fair to
become a powerful democratic leader. His pamphlets, full of scandalous
revelations of alleged malpractices of eminent Jews, were read with
avidity. No fewer than ten of them were written and published during
1892. Over and over again he was prosecuted for libel and convicted, but
this seemed only to strengthen his influence with his followers. The
Roman Catholic clergy and newspapers helped to inflame the popular
passions. The result was that anti-Jewish riots broke out. At Neustettin
the Jewish synagogue was burnt, and at Xanten the Blood Accusation was
revived, and a Jewish butcher was tried on the ancient charge of
murdering a Christian child for ritual purposes. The man was, of course,
acquitted, but the symptoms it revealed of reviving medievalism strongly
stirred the liberal and cultured mind of Germany. All protest, however,
seemed powerless, and the barbarian movement appeared destined to carry
everything before it.

German politics at this moment were in a very intricate state. Prince
Bismarck had retired, and Count Caprivi, with a programme of general
conciliation based on Liberal principles, was in power. Alarmed by the
non-renewal of the anti-Socialist law, and by the conclusion of
commercial treaties which made great concessions to German industry, the
landed gentry and the Conservative party became alienated from the new
chancellor. In January 1892 the split was completed by the withdrawal by
the government of the Primary Education bill, which had been designed to
place primary instruction on a religious basis. The Conservatives saw
their opportunity of posing as the party of Christianity against the
Liberals and Socialists, who had wrecked the bill, and they began to
look towards Ahlwardt as a possible ally. He had the advantages over
Stöcker that he was not a Socialist, and that he was prepared to lead
his apparently large following to assist the agrarian movement and
weaken the Social Democrats. The intrigue gradually came to light.
Towards the end of the year Herr Liebknecht, the Social Democratic
leader, denounced the Conservatives to the Reichstag as being concerned
"in using the anti-Semitic movement as a bastard edition of Socialism
for the use of stupid people." (1st December). Two days later the charge
was confirmed. At a meeting of the party held on the 3rd of December the
following plank was added to the Conservative programme: "We combat the
oppressive and disintegrating Jewish influence on our national life; we
demand for our Christian people a Christian magistracy and Christian
teachers for Christian pupils; we repudiate the excesses of
anti-Semitism." In pursuance of the resolution Ahlwardt was returned to
the Reichstag at a by-election by the Conservative district of
Arnswalde-Friedeberg. The coalition was, however, not yet completed. The
intransigeant Conservatives, led by Baron von Hammerstein, the editor of
the _Kreuz-Zeitung_, justly felt that the concluding sentence of the
resolution of the 3rd of December repudiating "the excesses of
anti-Semitism" was calculated to hinder a full and loyal co-operation
between the two parties. Accordingly on the 9th of December another
meeting of the party was summoned. Twelve hundred members met at the
Tivoli Hall in Berlin, and with only seven dissentients solemnly
expunged the offending sentence from the resolution. The history of
political parties may be searched in vain for a parallel to this
discreditable transaction.

The capture of the Conservative party proved the high-water mark of
German anti-Semitism. From that moment the tide began to recede. All
that was best in German national life was scandalized by the cynical
tactics of the Conservatives. The emperor, strong Christian though he
was, was shocked at the idea of serving Christianity by a compact with
unscrupulous demagogues and ignorant fanatics. Prince Bismarck growled
out a stinging sarcasm from his retreat at Friedrichsruh. Even Stöcker
raised his voice in protest against the "Ahlwardtismus" and
"Böckelianismus," and called upon his Conservative colleagues to
distinguish between "respectable and disreputable anti-Semitism." As for
the Liberals and Socialists, they filled the air with bitter laughter,
and declared from the housetops that the stupid party had at last been
overwhelmed by its own stupidity. The Conservatives began to suspect
that they had made a false step, and they were confirmed in this belief
by the conduct of their new ally in the Reichstag. His debut in
parliament was the signal for a succession of disgraceful scenes. His
whole campaign of calumny was transferred to the floor of the house, and
for some weeks the Reichstag discussed little else than his so-called
revelations. The Conservatives listened to his wild charges in
uncomfortable silence, and refused to support him. Stöcker opposed him
in a violent speech. The Radicals and Socialists, taking an accurate
measure of the shallow vanity of the man, adopted the policy of giving
him "enough rope." Shortly after his election he was condemned to five
months' imprisonment for libel, and he would have been arrested but for
the interposition of the Socialist party, including five Jews, who
claimed for him the immunities of a member of parliament. When he moved
for a commission to inquire into his revelations, it was again the
Socialist party which supported him, with the result that all his
charges, without exception, were found to be absolutely baseless.
Ahlwardt was covered with ridicule, and when in May the Reichstag was
dissolved, he was marched off to prison to undergo the sentence for
libel from which his parliamentary privilege had up to that moment
protected him.

His hold on the anti-Semitic populace was, however, not diminished. On
the contrary, the action of the Conservatives at the Tivoli congress
could not be at once eradicated from the minds of the Conservative
voters, and when the electoral campaign began it was found impossible to
explain to them that the party leaders had changed their minds. The
result was that Ahlwardt, although in prison, was elected by two
constituencies. At Arnswalde-Friedeberg he was returned in the teeth of
the opposition of the official Conservatives, and at Neustettin he
defeated no less a person than his anti-Semitic opponent Stöcker.
Fifteen other anti-Semites, all of the Ahlwardtian school, were elected.
This, however, represented little in the way of political influence; for
henceforth the party had to stand alone as one of the many minor
factions in the Reichstag, avoided by all the great parties, and too
weak to exercise any influence on the main course of affairs.

During the subsequent seven years it became more and more discredited.
The financial scandals connected with Förster's attempt to found a
Christian Socialist colony in Paraguay, the conviction of Baron von
Hammerstein, the anti-Semitic Conservative leader, for forgery and
swindling (1895-1896), and several minor scandals of the same unsavoury
character, covered the party with the very obloquy which it had
attempted to attach to the Jews. At the same time the Christian
Socialists who had remained with the Conservative party also suffered.
After the elections of 1893, Stöcker was dismissed from his post of
court preacher, and publicly reprimanded for speaking familiarly of the
empress. Two years later the Christian Socialist, Pastor Neumann,
observing the tendency of the Conservatives to coalesce with the
moderate Liberals in antagonism to Social Democracy, declared against
the Conservative party. The following year the emperor publicly
condemned Christian Socialism and the "political pastors," and Stöcker
was expelled from the Conservative party for refusing to modify the
socialistic propanganda of his organ, _Das Volk_. His fall was completed
by a quarrel with the Evangelical Social Union. He left the Union and
appealed to the Lutheran clergy to found a new church social
organization, but met with no response. Another blow to anti-Semitism
came from the Roman Catholics. They had become alarmed by the unbridled
violence of the Ahlwardtians, and when in 1894 Förster declared in an
address to the German anti-Semitic Union that anarchical outrages like
the murder of President Carnot were as much due to the "Anarchismus von
oben" as the "Anarchismus von unten," the Ultramontane _Germania_
publicly washed its hands of the Jew-baiters (1st of July 1894). Thus
gradually German anti-Semitism became stripped of every adventitious
alliance; and at the general election of 1898 it only managed to return
twelve members to the Reichstag, and in 1903 its party strength fell to
nine. A remarkable revival in its fortunes, however, took place between
1905 and 1907. Identifying itself with the extreme Chauvinists and
Anglophobes it profited by the anti-national errors of the Clericals and
Socialists, and won no fewer than twelve by-elections. At the general
election of 1907 its jingoism and aggressive Protestantism were rewarded
with twenty-five seats. It is clear, however, from the figures of the
second ballots that these successes owed far more to the tendencies of
the party in the field of general politics than to its anti-Semitism.
Indeed the specifically anti-Semitic movement has shown little activity
since 1893.

The causes of the decline of German anti-Semitism are not difficult to
determine. While it remained a theory of nationality and a fad of the
metaphysicians, it made considerable noise in the world, but without
exercising much practical influence. When it attempted to play an active
part in politics it became submerged by the ignorant and superstitious
voters, who could not understand its scientific justification, but who
were quite ready to declaim and riot against the Jew bogey. It thus
became a sort of Jacquerie which, being exploited by unscrupulous
demagogues, soon alienated all its respectable elements. Its moments of
real importance have been due not to inherent strength but to the uses
made of it by other political parties for their own purposes. These
coalitions are no longer of perilous significance so far as the Jews are
concerned, chiefly because, in face of the menace of democratic
socialism and its unholy alliance with the Roman Catholic Centrum, all
supporters of the present organization of society have found it
necessary to sink their differences. The new social struggle has
eclipsed the racial theory of nationality. The Social Democrat became
the enemy, and the new reaction counted on the support of the rich Jews
and the strongly individualist Jewish middle class to assist it in
preserving the existing social structure. Hence in Prince Billow's
"Bloc" (1908) anti-Semites figured side by side with Judeophil Radicals.

  Russia.

More serious have been the effects of German anti-Semitic teachings on
the political and social life of the countries adjacent to the
empire--Russia, Austria and France. In Russia these effects were first
seriously felt owing to the fury of autocratic reaction to which the
tragic death of the tsar Alexander II. gave rise. This, however, like
the Strousberg _Krach_ in Germany, was only the proximate cause of the
outbreak. There were other elements which had created a _milieu_
peculiarly favourable to the transplantation of the German craze. In the
first place the medieval anti-Semitism was still an integral part of the
polity of the empire. The Jews were cooped up in one huge ghetto in the
western provinces, "marked out to all their fellow-countrymen as aliens,
and a pariah caste set apart for special and degrading treatment"
(_Persecution of the Jews in Russia_, 1891, p.5). In the next place,
owing to the emancipation of the serfs which had half ruined the
landowners, while creating a free but moneyless peasantry, the Jews, who
could be neither nobles nor peasants, had found a vocation as
money-lenders and as middlemen between the grain producers, and the
grain consumers and exporters. There is no evidence that this function
was performed, as a rule, in an exorbitant or oppressive way. On the
contrary, the fall in the value of cereals on all the provincial
markets, after the riots of 1881, shows that the Jewish competition had
previously assured full prices to the farmers (Schwabacher,
_Denkschrift_, 1882, p. 27). Nevertheless, the Jewish activity or
"exploitation," as it was called, was resented, and the ill-feeling it
caused among landowners and farmers was shared by non-Jewish middlemen
and merchants who had thereby been compelled to be satisfied with small
profits. Still there was but little thought of seeking a remedy in an
organized anti-Jewish movement. On the contrary, the abnormal situation
aggravated by the disappointments and depression caused by the Turkish
war, had stimulated a widespread demand for constitutional changes which
would enable the people to adopt a state-machinery more exactly suited
to their needs. Among the peasantry this demand was promoted and
fomented by the Nihilists, and among the landowners it was largely
adopted as a means of checking what threatened to become a new Jacquerie
(Walcker, _Gegertwärtige Lage Russlands_, 1873; _Innere Krisis
Russlands_, 1876). The tsar, Alexander II., strongly sympathized with
this movement, and on the advice of Count Loris-Melikov and the council
of ministers a rudimentary scheme of parliamentary government had been
drafted and actually signed when the emperor was assassinated. Meanwhile
a nationalist and reactionary agitation, originating like its German
analogue in the Hegelianism of a section of the lettered public, had
manifested itself in Moscow. After some early vicissitudes, it had been
organized, under the auspices of Alexis Kireiev, Chomyakov, Aksakov and
Kochelev, into the Slavophil party, with a Romanticist programme of
reforms based on the old traditions of the pre-Petrine epoch. This party
gave a great impetus to Slav nationalism. Its final possibilities were
sanguinarily illustrated by Muraviev's campaign in Poland in 1863, and
in the war against Turkey in 1877, which was exclusively its handiwork
(Statement by General Kireiev: Schütz, _Das heutige Russland_, p. 104).
After the assassination of Alexander II. the Slavophil teaching, as
expounded by Ignatiev and Pobêdonostsev, became paramount in the
government, and the new tsar was persuaded to cancel the constitutional
project of his father. The more liberal views of a section of the
Slavophils under Aksakov, who had been in favour of representative
institutions on traditional lines, were displaced by the reactionary
system of Pobêdonostsev, who took his stand on absolutism, orthodoxy and
the racial unity of the Russian people. This was the situation on the
eve of Easter 1881. The hardening nationalism above, the increasing
discontent below, the economic activity of the Hebrew heretics and
aliens, and the echoes of anti-Semitism from over the western border
were combining for an explosion.

A scuffle in a tavern at Elisabethgrad in Kherson sufficed to ignite
this combustible material. The scuffle grew into a riot, the tavern was
sacked, and the drunken mob, hounded on by agitators who declared that
the Jews were using Christian blood for the manufacture of their Easter
bread, attacked and looted the Jewish quarter. The outbreak spread
rapidly. On the 7th of May there was a similar riot at Smiela, near
Cherkasy, and the following day there was a violent outbreak at Kiev,
which left 2000 Jews homeless. Within a few weeks the whole of western
Russia, from the Black Sea to the Baltic, was smoking with the ruins of
Jewish homes. Scores of Jewish women were dishonoured, hundreds of men,
women and children were slaughtered, and tens of thousands were reduced
to beggary and left without a shelter. Murderous riots or incendiary
outrages took place in no fewer than 167 towns and villages, including
Warsaw, Odessa and Kiev. Europe had witnessed no such scenes of mob
savagery since the Black Death massacres in the 14th century. As the
facts gradually filtered through to the western capitals they caused a
thrill of horror everywhere. An indignation meeting held at the Mansion
House in London, under the presidency of the lord mayor, was the signal
for a long series of popular demonstrations condemning the persecutions,
held in most of the chief cities of England and the continent.

Except as stimulated by the Judeophobe revival in Germany the Russian
outbreak in its earlier forms does not belong specifically to modern
anti-Semitism. It was essentially a medieval uprising animated by the
religious fanaticism, gross superstition and predatory instincts of a
people still in the medieval stage of their development. This is proved
by the fact that, although the Russian peasant was supposed to be a
victim of unbearable Jewish "exploitation," he was not moved to riot
until he had been brutalized by drink and excited by the old fable of
the Blood Accusation. The modern anti-Semitic element came from above
and followed closely on the heels of the riots. It has been freely
charged against the Russian government that it promoted the riots in
1881 in order to distract popular attention from the Nihilist propaganda
and from the political disappointments involved in the cancellation of
the previous tsar's constitutional project (Lazare, _L'Antisémitisme_,
p. 211). This seems to be true of General Ignatiev, then minister of the
interior, and the secret police (Séménoff, _The Russian Government and
the Massacres_, pp. 17, 32, 241). It is certain that the local
authorities, both civil and military, favoured the outbreak, and took no
steps to suppress it, and that the feudal bureaucracy who had just
escaped a great danger were not sorry to see the discontented populace
venting their passions on the Jews. In the higher circles of the
government, however, other views prevailed. The tsar himself was at
first persuaded that the riots were the work of Nihilists, and he
publicly promised his protection to the Jews. On the other hand, his
ministers, ardent Slavophils, thought they recognized in the outbreak an
endorsement of the nationalist teaching of which they were the apostles,
and, while reprobating the acts of violence, came to the conclusion that
the most reasonable solution was to aggravate the legal disabilities of
the persecuted aliens and heretics. To this view the tsar was won over,
partly by the clamorous indignation of western Europe, which had wounded
his national _amour propre_ to the quick, and partly by the strongly
partisan report of a commission appointed to inquire, not into the
administrative complaisance which had allowed riot to run loose over the
western and southern provinces, but into the "exploitation" alleged
against the Jews, the reasons why "the former laws limiting the rights
of the Jews" had been mitigated, and how these laws could be altered so
as "to stop the pernicious conduct of the Jews" (Rescript of the 3rd of
September 1881). The result of this report was the drafting of a
"Temporary Order concerning the Jews" by the minister of the interior,
which received the assent of the tsar on the 3rd of May 1882. This
order, which was so little temporary that it has not yet been repealed,
had the effect of creating a number of fresh ghettos within the pale of
Jewish settlement. The Jews were cooped up within the towns, and their
rural interests were arbitrarily confiscated. The doubtful incidence of
the order gave rise to a number of judgments of the senate, by which all
its persecuting possibilities were brought out, with the result that the
activities of the Jews were completely paralysed, and they became a prey
to unparalleled cruelty. As the gruesome effect of this legislation
became known, a fresh outburst of horror and indignation swelled up from
western Europe. It proved powerless. Count Ignatiev was dismissed owing
to the protests of high-placed Russians, who were disgusted by the new
_Kulturkampf_, but his work remained, and, under the influence of
Pobêdonostsev, the procurator of the Holy Synod, the policy of the "May
Laws," as they were significantly called, was applied to every aspect of
Jewish life with pitiless rigour. The temper of the tsar may be judged
by the fact that when an appeal for mercy from an illustrious personage
in England was conveyed to him at Fredensborg through the gracious
medium of the tsaritsa, he angrily exclaimed within the hearing of an
Englishman in the ante-room who was the bearer of the message, "Never
let me hear you mention the name of that people again!"

The Russian May Laws are the most conspicuous legislative monument
achieved by modern anti-Semitism. It is true that they re-enacted
regulations which resemble the oppressive statutes introduced into
Poland through the influence of the Jesuits in the 16th century
(Sternberg, _Gesch. d. Juden in Polen_, pp. 141 et seq.), but their
Orthodox authors were as little conscious of this irony of history as
they were of the Teutonic origins of the whole Slavophil movement. These
laws are an experimental application of the political principles
extracted by Marr and his German disciples from the metaphysics of
Hegel, and as such they afford a valuable means of testing the practical
operation of modern anti-Semitism. Their result was a widespread
commercial depression which was felt all over the empire. Even before
the May Laws were definitely promulgated the passport registers showed
that the anti-Semitic movement had driven 67,900 Jews across the
frontier, and it was estimated that they had taken with them 13,000,000
roubles, representing a minimum loss of 60,000,000 roubles to the annual
turnover of the country's trade. Towards the end of 1882 it was
calculated that the agitation had cost Russia as much as the whole
Turkish war of 1877. Trade was everywhere paralysed. The enormous
increase of bankruptcies, the transfer of investments to foreign funds,
the consequent fall in the value of the rouble and the prices of Russian
stocks, the suspension of farming operations owing to advances on
growing crops being no longer available, the rise in the prices of the
necessaries of life, and lastly, the appearance of famine, filled half
the empire with gloom. Banks closed their doors, and the great
provincial fairs proved failures. When it was proposed to expel the Jews
from Moscow there was a loud outcry all over the sacred city, and even
the Orthodox merchants, realizing that the measure would ruin their
flourishing trade with the south and west, petitioned against it. The
Moscow Exhibition proved a failure. Nevertheless the government
persisted with its harsh policy, and Jewish refugees streamed by tens of
thousands across the western frontier to seek an asylum in other lands.
In 1891 the alarm caused by this emigration led to further protests from
abroad. The citizens of London again assembled at Guildhall, and
addressed a petition to the tsar on behalf of his Hebrew subjects. It
was handed back to the lord mayor by the Russian ambassador, with a curt
intimation that the emperor declined to receive it. At the same time
orders were defiantly given that the May Laws should be strictly
enforced. Meanwhile the Russian minister of finance was at his wits'
ends for money. Negotiations for a large loan had been entered upon with
the house of Rothschild, and a preliminary contract had been signed,
when, at the instance of the London firm, M. Wyshnigradski, the finance
minister, was informed that unless the persecutions of the Jews were
stopped the great banking-house would be compelled to withdraw from the
operation. Deeply mortified by this attempt to deal with him _de
puissance à puissance_, the tsar peremptorily broke off the
negotiations, and ordered that overtures should be made to a non-Jewish
French syndicate. In this way anti-Semitism, which had already so
profoundly influenced the domestic politics of Europe, set its mark on
the international relations of the powers, for it was the urgent need of
the Russian treasury quite as much as the termination of Prince
Bismarck's secret treaty of mutual neutrality which brought about the
Franco-Russian alliance (Daudet, _Hist. Dipl. de l'Alliance
Franco-Russe_, pp. 259 et. seq.).

For nearly three years more the persecutions continued. Elated by the
success of his crusade against the Jews, Pobêdonostsev extended his
persecuting policy to other non-Orthodox denominations. The legislation
against the Protestant Stundists became almost as unbearable as that
imposed on the Jews. In the report of the Holy Synod, presented to the
tsar towards the end of 1893, the procurator called for repressive
measures against Roman Catholics, Moslems and Buddhists, and denounced
the rationalist tendency of the whole system of secular education in the
empire (_Neue Freie Presse_, 31st January 1894). A year later, however,
the tsar died, and his successor, without repealing any of the
persecuting laws, let it gradually be understood that their rigorous
application might be mitigated. The country was tired and exhausted by
the persecution, and the tolerant hints which came from high quarters
were acted upon with significant alacrity.

A new era of conflict dawned with the great constitutional struggle
towards the end of the century. The conditions, however, were very
different from those which prevailed in the 'eighties. The May Laws had
avenged themselves with singular fitness. By confining the Jews to the
towns at the very moment that Count Witte's policy of protection was
creating an enormous industrial proletariat they placed at the disposal
of the disaffected masses an ally powerful in numbers and intelligence,
and especially in its bitter sense of wrong, its reckless despair and
its cosmopolitan outlook and connexions. As early as 1885 the Jewish
workmen assisted by Jewish university students led the way in the
formation of trades unions. They also became the _colporteurs_ of
western European socialism, and they played an important part in the
organization of the Russian Social Democratic Federation which their
"Arbeiter Bund" joined in 1898 with no fewer than 30,000 members. The
Jewish element in the new democratic movement excited the resentment of
the government, and under the minister of the interior, M. Sipiaguine,
the persecuting laws were once more rigorously enforced. The "Bund"
replied in 1901 by proclaiming itself frankly political and
revolutionary, and at once took a leading place in the revolutionary
movement. The reactionaries were not slow to profit by this
circumstance. With the support of M. Plehve, the new minister of the
interior, and the whole of the bureaucratic class they denounced the
revolution as a Jewish conspiracy, engineered for exclusively Jewish
purposes and designed to establish a Jewish domination over the Russian
people. The government and even the intimates of the tsar became
persuaded that only by the terrorization of the Jews could the
revolutionary movement be effectually dealt with. For this purpose a
so-called League of True Russians was formed. Under high patronage, and
with the assistance of the secret police and a large number of the local
authorities, it set itself to stir up the populace, chiefly the fanatics
and the hooligans, against the Jews. Incendiary proclamations were
prepared and printed in the ministry of the interior itself, and were
circulated by the provincial governors and the police (Prince Urussov's
speech in the Duma, June 8 (21), 1906). The result was another series of
massacres which began at Kishinev in 1903 and culminated in wholesale
butchery at Odessa and Bielostok in October 1905. An attempt was made to
picture and excuse these outbreaks as a national upheaval against the
Jew-made revolution but it failed. They only embittered the
revolutionists and "intellectuals" throughout the country, and won for
them a great deal of outspoken sympathy abroad. The artificiality of the
anti-Jewish outbreak was illustrated by the first Duma elections.
Thirteen Jews were elected and every constituency which had been the
scene of a _pogrom_ returned a liberal member. Unfortunately the Jews
benefited little by the new parliamentary constitution. The privileges
of voting for members of the Duma and of sitting in the new assembly
were granted them, but all their civil and religious disabilities were
maintained. Both the first and the second Duma proposed to emancipate
them, but they were dissolved before any action could be taken. By the
modification of the electoral law under which the third Duma was elected
the voting power of the Jews was diminished and further restrictions
were imposed upon them through official intimidation during the
elections. The result was that only two Jews were elected, while the
reactionary tendency of the new electorate virtually removed the
question of their emancipation from the field of practical politics.

  Rumania.

The only other country in Europe in which a legalized anti-Semitism
exists is Rumania. The conditions are very similar to those which obtain
in Russia, with the important difference that Rumania is a
constitutional country, and that the Jewish persecutions are the work of
the elected deputies of the nation. Like the _Bourgeois Gentilhomme_ who
wrote prose all his life without knowing it, the Rumanians practised the
nationalist doctrines of the Hegelian anti-Semites unconsciously long
before they were formulated in Germany. In the old days of Turkish
domination the lot of the Rumanian Jews was not conspicuously unhappy.
It was only when the nation began to be emancipated, and the struggle in
the East assumed the form of a crusade against Islam that the Jews were
persecuted. Rumanian politicians preached a nationalism limited
exclusively to indigenous Christians, and they were strongly supported
by all who felt the commercial competition of the Jews. Thus, although
the Jews had been settled in the land for many centuries, they were by
law declared aliens. This was done in defiance of the treaty of Paris of
1856 and the convention of 1858 which declared all Rumans to be equal
before the law. Under the influence of this distinction the Jews became
persecuted, and sanguinary riots were of frequent occurrence. The
realization of a Jewish question led to legislation imposing
disabilities on the Jews. In 1878 the congress of Berlin agreed to
recognize the independence of Rumania on condition that all religious
disabilities were removed. Rumania agreed to this condition, but
ultimately persuaded the powers to allow her to carry out the
emancipation of the Jews gradually. Persecutions, however, continued,
and in 1902 they led to a great exodus of Jews. The United States
addressed a strong remonstrance to the Rumanian government, but the
condition of the Jews was in no way improved. Their emancipation was in
1908 as far off as ever, and their disabilities heavier than those of
their brethren in Russia. For this state of things the example of the
anti-Semites in Germany, Russia, Austria and France was largely to
blame, since it had justified the intolerance of the Rumans. Owing,
also, to the fact that of late years Rumania had become a sort of
_annexe_ of the Triple Alliance, it was found impossible to induce the
signatories of the treaty of Berlin to take action to compel the state
to fulfil its obligations under that treaty.

  Austria-Hungary.

In Austria-Hungary the anti-Semitic impulses came almost simultaneously
from the North and East. Already in the 'seventies the doctrinaire
anti-Semitism of Berlin had found an echo in Budapest. Two members of
the diet, Victor Istoczy and Geza Onody, together with a publicist named
Georg Marczianyi, busied themselves in making known the doctrine of Marr
in Hungary. Marczianyi, who translated the German Judeophobe pamphlets
into Magyar, and the Magyar works of Onody into German, was the chief
medium between the northern and southern schools. In 1880 Istoczy tried
to establish a "Nichtjuden Bund" in Hungary, with statutes literally
translated from those of the German anti-Semitic league. The movement,
however, made no progress, owing to the stalwart Liberalism of the
predominant political parties, and of the national principles inherited
from the revolution of 1848. The large part played by the Jews in that
struggle, and the fruitful patriotism with which they had worked for the
political and economic progress of the country, had created, too, a
strong claim on the gratitude of the best elements in the nation.
Nevertheless, among the ultramontane clergy, the higher aristocracy, the
ill-paid minor officials, and the ignorant peasantry, the seeds of a
tacit anti-Semitism were latent. It was probably the aversion of the
nobility from anything in the nature of a demagogic agitation which for
a time prevented these seeds from germinating. The news of the uprising
in Russia and the appearance of Jewish refugees on the frontier, had the
effect of giving a certain prominence to the agitation of Istoczy and
Onody and of exciting the rural communities, but it did not succeed in
impressing the public with the pseudo-scientific doctrines of the new
anti-Semitism. It was not until the agitators resorted to the Blood
Accusation--that never-failing decoy of obscurantism and
superstition--that Hungary took a definite place in the anti-Semitic
movement. The outbreak was short and fortunately bloodless, but while it
lasted its scandals shocked the whole of Europe.

Dr August Rohling, professor of Hebrew at the university of Prague, a
Roman Catholic theologian of high position but dubious learning, had for
some years assisted the Hungarian anti-Semites with _réchauffés_ of
Eisenmenger's _Enidecktes Judenthum_ (Frankfurt a/M. 1700). In 1881 he
made a solemn deposition before the Supreme Court accusing the Jews of
being bound by their law to work the moral and physical ruin of
non-Jews. He followed this up with an offer to depose on oath that the
murder of Christians for ritual purposes was a doctrine secretly taught
among Jews. Professor Delitzsch and other eminent Hebraists, both
Christian and Jewish, exposed and denounced the ignorance and
malevolence of Rohling, but were unable to stem the mischief he was
causing. In April 1882 a Christian girl named Esther Sobymossi was
missed from the Hungarian village of Tisza Eszlar, where a small
community of Jews were settled. The rumour got abroad that she had been
kidnapped and murdered by the Jews, but it remained the burden of idle
gossip, and gave rise to neither judicial complaint nor public
disorders. At this moment the question of the Bosnian Pacification
credits was before the diet. The unpopularity of the task assumed by
Austria-Hungary, under the treaty of Berlin, which was calculated to
strengthen the disaffected Croat element in the empire, had reduced the
government majority to very small proportions, and all the reactionary
factions in the country were accordingly in arms. The government was
violently and unscrupulously attacked on all sides. On the 23rd of May
there was a debate in the diet when M. Onody, in an incendiary harangue,
told the story of the missing girl at Tisza Eszlar, and accused
ministers of criminal indulgence to races alien to the national spirit.
In the then excited state of the public mind on the Croat question, the
manoeuvre was adroitly conceived. The government fell into the trap, and
treated the story with lofty disdain. Thereupon the anti-Semites set to
work on the case, and M. Joseph Bary, the magistrate at Nyiregyhaza, and
a noted anti-Semite, was induced to go to Tisza Eszlar and institute an
inquiry. All the anti-liberal elements in the country now became banded
together in this effort to discredit the liberal government, and for the
first time the Hungarian anti-Semites found themselves at the head of a
powerful party. Fifteen Jews were arrested and thrown into prison. No
pains were spared in preparing the case for trial. Perjury and even
forgery were freely resorted to. The son of one of the accused, a boy of
fourteen, was taken into custody by the police, and by threats and
cajoleries prevailed upon to give evidence for the prosecution. He was
elaborately coached for the terrible _rôle_ he was to play. The trial
opened at Nyiregyhaza on the 19th of June, and lasted till the 3rd of
August. It was one of the most dramatic _causes celèbres_ of the
century. Under the brilliant cross-examination of the advocates for the
defence the whole of the shocking conspiracy was gradually exposed. The
public prosecutor thereupon withdrew from the case, and the four
judges--the chief of whom held strong anti-Semitic opinions--unanimously
acquitted all the prisoners. The case proved the death-blow of Hungarian
anti-Semitism. Although another phase of the Jewish question, which will
be referred to presently, had still to occupy the public mind, the shame
brought on the nation by the Tisza Eszlar conspiracy effectually
prevented the anti-Semites from raising their voices with any effect
again.

Meanwhile a more formidable and complicated outburst was preparing in
Austria itself. Here the lines of the German agitation were closely
followed, but with far more dramatic results. It was exclusively
political--that is to say, it appealed to anti-Jewish prejudices for
party purposes while it sought to rehabilitate them on a
pseudo-scientific basis, racial and economic. At first it was confined
to sporadic pamphleteers. By their side there gradually grew up a school
of Christian Socialists, recruited from the ultra-Clericals, for the
study and application of the doctrines preached at Mainz by Archbishop
Ketteler. This constituted a complete Austrian analogue to the
Evangelical-Socialist movement started in Germany by Herr Stöcker. For
some years the two movements remained distinct, but signs of
approximation were early visible. Thus one of the first complaints of
the anti-Semites was that the Jews were becoming masters of the soil.
This found an echo in the agrarian principles of the Christian
Socialists, as expounded by Rudolph Meyer, in which individualism in
landed property was admitted on the condition that the landowners were
"the families of the nation" and not "cosmopolitan financiers." A
further indication of anti-Semitism is found in a speech delivered in
1878 by Prince Alois von Liechtenstein (b. 1846), the most prominent
disciple of Rudolph Meyer, who denounced the national debt as a tribute
paid by the state to cosmopolitan rentiers (Nitti, _Catholic Socialism_,
pp. 200, 201, 211, 216). The growing disorder in parliament, due to the
bitter struggle between the German and Czech parties, served to bring
anti-Semitism into the field of practical politics. Since 1867 the
German Liberals had been in power. They had made enemies of the
Clericals by tampering with the concordat, and they had split up their
own party by the federalist policy adopted by Count Taaffe. The Radical
secessionists in their turn found it difficult to agree, and an
ultra-national German wing formed itself into a separate party under the
leadership of Ritter von Schonerer (b. 1842), a Radical nationalist of
the most violent type. In 1882 two anti-Semitic leagues had been founded
in Vienna, and to these the Radical nationalists now appealed for
support. The growing importance of the party led the premier, Count
Taaffe, to angle for the support of the Clericals by accepting a portion
of the Christian Socialist programme. The hostility this excited in the
liberal press, largely written by Jews, served to bring the feudal
Christian Socialists and Radical anti-Semites together. In 1891 these
strangely assorted factions became consolidated, and during the
elections of that year Prince Liechtenstein came forward as an
anti-Semitic candidate and the acknowledged leader of the party. The
elections resulted in the return of fifteen anti-Semites to the
Reichsrath, chiefly from Vienna.

Although Prince Liechtenstein and the bulk of the Christian Socialists
had joined the anti-Semites with the support of the Clerical organ, the
_Vaterland_, the Clerical party as a whole still held aloof from the
Jew-baiters. The events of 1892-1895 put an end to their hesitation. The
Hungarian government, in compliance with long-standing pledges to the
liberal party, introduced into the diet a series of ecclesiastical
reform bills providing for civil marriage, freedom of worship, and the
legal recognition of Judasim on an equality with other denominations.
These proposals, which synchronized with Ahlwardt's turbulent agitation
in Germany, gave a great impulse to anti-Semitism and served to drive
into its ranks a large number of Clericals. The agitation was taken in
hand by the Roman Catholic clergy, and the pulpits resounded with
denunciations of the Jews. One clergyman, Father Deckert, was prosecuted
for preaching the Blood Accusation and convicted (1894). Cardinal
Schlauch, bishop of Grosswardein, declared in the Hungarian House of
Magnates that the Liberals were in league with "cosmopolitans" for the
ruin of the country. In October 1894 the magnates adopted two of the
ecclesiastical bills with amendments, but threw out the Jewish bill by a
majority of six. The crown sided with the magnates, and the ministry
resigned, although it had a majority in the Lower House. An effort was
made to form a Clerical cabinet, but it failed. Baron Banffy was then
entrusted with the construction of a fresh Liberal ministry. The
announcement that he would persist with the ecclesiastical bills lashed
the Clericals and anti-Semites into a fury, and the agitation broke out
afresh. The pope addressed a letter to Count Zichy encouraging the
magnates to resist, and once more two of the bills were amended, and the
third rejected. The papal nuncio, Mgr. Agliardi, now thought proper to
pay a visit to Budapest, where he allowed himself to be interviewed on
the crisis. This interference in the domestic concerns of Hungary was
deeply resented by the Liberals, and Baron Banffy requested Count
Kalnoky, the imperial minister of foreign affairs, to protest against it
at the Vatican. Count Kalnoky refused and tendered his resignation to
the emperor. Clerical sympathies were predominant in Vienna, and the
emperor was induced for a moment to decline the count's resignation. It
soon became clear, however, that the Hungarians were resolved to see the
crisis out, and that in the end Vienna would be compelled to give way.
The emperor accordingly retraced his steps, Count Kalnoky's resignation
was accepted, the papal nuncio was recalled, a batch of new magnates
were created, and the Hungarian ecclesiastical bills passed.

Simultaneously with this crisis another startling phase of the
anti-Semitic drama was being enacted in Vienna itself. Encouraged by the
support of the Clericals the anti-Semites resolved to make an effort to
carry the Vienna municipal elections. So far the alliance of the
Clericals with the anti-Semites had been unofficial, but on the eve of
the elections (January 1895) the pope, influenced partly by the
Hungarian crisis and partly by an idea of Cardinal Rampolla that the
best antidote to democratic socialism would be a clerically controlled
fusion of the Christian Socialists and anti-Semites, sent his blessing
to Prince Liechtenstein and his followers. This action alarmed the
government and a considerable body of the higher episcopate, who felt
assured that any permanent encouragement given to the anti-Semites would
in the end strengthen the parties of sedition and disorder. Cardinal
Schönborn was despatched in haste to Rome to expostulate with the
pontiff, and his representations were strongly supported by the French
and Belgian bishops. The mischief was however, done, and although the
pope sent a verbal message to Prince Liechtenstein excluding the
anti-Semites from his blessing, the elections resulted in a great
triumph for the Jew-haters. The municipal council was immediately
dissolved by the government, and new elections were ordered, but these
only strengthened the position of the anti-Semites, who carried 92 seats
out of a total of 138. A cabinet crisis followed, and the premiership
was entrusted to the Statthalter of Galicia, Count Badeni, who assumed
office with a pledge of war to the knife against anti-Semitism. In
October the new municipal council elected as burgomaster of Vienna Dr
Karl Lueger (b. 1844), a vehement anti-Semite, who had displaced Prince
Liechtenstein as leader of the party. The emperor declined to sanction
the election, but the council repeated it in face of the imperial
displeasure. Once more a dissolution was ordered, and for three months
the city was governed by administrative commissioners. In February 1896
elections were again held, and the anti-Semites were returned with an
increased majority. The emperor then capitulated, and after a temporary
arrangement, by which for one year Dr Lueger acted as vice-burgomaster
and handed over the burgomastership to an inoffensive nominee, permitted
the municipal council to have its way. The growing anarchy in parliament
at this moment served still further to strengthen the anti-Semites, and
their conquest of Vienna was speedily followed by a not less striking
conquest of the Landtag of Lower Austria (November 1896).

Since then a reaction of sanity has slowly but surely asserted itself.
In 1908 the anti-Semites had governed Vienna twelve years, and, although
they had accomplished much mischief, the millennium of which they were
supposed to be the heralds had not dawned. On the contrary, the
commercial interests of the city had suffered and the rates had been
enormously increased (_Neue Freie Presse_, 29th March 1901), while the
predatory hopes which secured them office had only been realized on a
small and select scale. The spectacle of a Clerico-anti-Semitic tammany
in Vienna had strengthened the resistance of the better elements in the
country. Time had also shown that Christian Socialism is only a disguise
for high Toryism, and that the German Radicals who were originally
induced to join the anti-Semites had been victimized by the Clericals.
The fruits of this disillusion began to show themselves in the general
elections of 1900-1901, when the anti-Semites lost six seats in the
Reichsrath. The elections were followed (26th January 1901) by a papal
encyclical on Christian democracy, in which Christian Socialism was
declared to be a term unacceptable to the Church, and the faithful were
adjured to abstain from agitation of a demagogic and revolutionary
character, and "to respect the rights of others." Nevertheless, in 1907
the Christian Socialists trebled their representation in the Reichsrath.
This, however, was due more to their alliance with the German national
parties than to any large increase of anti-Semitism in the electorate.

  France.

The last country in Europe to make use of the teachings of German
anti-Semitism in its party politics was France. The fact that the
movement should have struck root in a republican country, where the
ideals of democratic freedom have been so passionately cultivated, has
been regarded as one of the paradoxes of our latter-day history. As a
matter of fact, it is more surprising that it was not adopted earlier.
All the social and political conditions which produced anti-Semitism in
Germany were present in France, but in an aggravated form due primarily
to the very republican _régime_ which at first sight seemed to be a
guarantee against it. In the monarchical states the dominance of the
_bourgeoisie_ was tempered in a measure by the power of the crown and
the political activity of the aristocracy, which carried with them a
very real restraining influence in the matter of political honour and
morality. In France these restraining influences were driven out of
public life by the republic. The nobility both of the _ancien régime_
and the empire stood aloof, and politics were abandoned for the most
part to professional adventurers, while the _bourgeoisie_ assumed the
form of an omnipotent plutocracy. This naturally attracted to France all
the financial adventurers in Europe, and in the train of the immigration
came not a few German Jews, alienated from their own country by the
agitation of Marr and Stöcker. Thus the _bourgeoisie_ was not only more
powerful in France than in other countries, but the obnoxiousness of its
Jewish element was accentuated by a tinge of the national enemy. The
anti-clericalism of the _bourgeois_ republic and its unexampled series
of financial scandals, culminating in the Panama "Krach," thus sufficed
to give anti-Semitism a strong hold on the public mind.

Nevertheless, it was not until 1882 that the anti-Jewish movement was
seriously heard of in France. Paul Bontoux (b. 1820), who had formerly
been in the employ of the Rothschilds, but had been obliged to leave
the firm in consequence of his disastrous speculations, had joined the
Legitimist party, and had started the Union Générale with funds obtained
from his new allies. Bontoux promised to break up the alleged financial
monopoly of the Jews and Protestants and to found a new plutocracy in
its stead, which should be mainly Roman Catholic and aristocratic. The
bait was eagerly swallowed. For five years the Union Générale, with the
blessing of the pope, pursued an apparently prosperous career. Immense
schemes were undertaken, and the 123-fr. shares rose gradually to 3200
francs. The whole structure, however, rested on a basis of audacious
speculation, and in January 1882 the Union Générale failed, with
liabilities amounting to 312,000,000 francs. The cry was at once raised
that the collapse was due to the manoeuvres of the Jews, and a strong
anti-Semitic feeling manifested itself in clerical and aristocratic
circles. In 1886 violent expression was given to this feeling in a book
since become famous, _La France juive_, by Edouard Drumont (b. 1844).
The author illustrated the theories of German anti-Semitism with a
_chronique scandaleuse_ full of piquant personalities, in which the
corruption of French national life under Jewish influences was painted
in alarming colours. The book was read with avidity by the public, who
welcomed its explanations of the obviously growing debauchery. The
Wilson scandals and the suspension of the Panama Company in the
following year, while not bearing out Drumont's anti-Semitism, fully
justified his view of the prevailing corruption. Out of this condition
of things rose the Boulangist movement, which rallied all the
disaffected elements in the country, including Drumont's following of
anti-Semites. It was not, however, until the flight of General Boulanger
and the ruin of his party that anti-Semitism came forward as a political
movement.

The chief author of the rout of Boulangism was a Jewish politician and
journalist, Joseph Reinach (b. 1856), formerly private secretary to
Gambetta, and one of the ablest men in France. He was a Frenchman by
birth and education, but his father and uncles were Germans, who had
founded an important banking establishment in Paris. Hence he was held
to personify the alien Jewish domination in France, and the
ex-Boulangists turned against him and his co-religionists with fury. The
Boulangist agitation had for a second time involved the Legitimists in
heavy pecuniary losses, and under the leadership of the marquis de Morès
they now threw all their influence on the side of Drumont. An
anti-Semitic league was established, and with Royalist assistance
branches were organized all over the country. The Franco-Russian
alliance in 1891, when the persecutions of the Jews by Pobêdonostsev
were attracting the attention of Europe, served to invest Drumont's
agitation with a fashionable and patriotic character. It was a sign of
the spiritual approximation of the two peoples. In 1892 Drumont founded
a daily anti-Semitic newspaper, _La Libre Parole_. With the organization
of this journal a regular campaign for the discovery of scandals was
instituted. At the same time a body of aristocratic swashbucklers, with
the marquis de Morès and the comte de Lamase at their head, set
themselves to terrorize the Jews and provoke them to duels. At a meeting
held at Neuilly in 1891, Jules Guérin, one of the marquis de Morès's
lieutenants, had demanded rhetorically _un cadavre de Juif_. He had not
long to wait. Anti-Semitism was most powerful in the army, which was the
only branch of the public service in which the reactionary classes were
fully represented. The republican law compelling the seminarists to
serve their term in the army had strengthened its Clerical and Royalist
elements, and the result was a movement against the Jewish officers, of
whom 500 held commissions. A series of articles in the _Libre Parole_
attacking these officers led to a number of ferocious duels, and these
culminated in 1892 in the death of an amiable and popular Jewish
officer, Captain Armand Mayer, of the Engineers, who fell, pierced
through the lungs by the marquis de Morès. This tragedy, rendered all
the more painful by the discovery that Captain Mayer had chivalrously
fought to shield a friend, aroused a great deal of popular indignation
against the anti-Semites, and for a moment it was believed that the
agitation had been killed with its victim.

Towards the end of 1892, the discovery of the widespread corruption
practised by the Panama Company gave a fresh impulse to anti-Semitism.
The revelations were in a large measure due to the industry of the
_Libre Parole_; and they were all the more welcome to the readers of
that journal since it was discovered that three Jews were implicated in
the scandals, one of whom, baron de Reinach, was uncle and father-in-law
to the hated destroyer of Boulangism. The escape of the other two, Dr
Cornelius Herz and M. Arton, and the difficulties experienced in
obtaining their extradition, deepened the popular conviction that the
authorities were implicated in the scandals, and kept the public eye for
a long time absorbed by the otherwise restricted Jewish aspects of the
scandals. In 1894 the military side of the agitation was revived by the
arrest of a prominent Jewish staff officer, Captain Alfred Dreyfus, on a
charge of treason. From the beginning the hand of the anti-Semite was
flagrant in the new sensation. The first hint of the arrest appeared in
the _Libre Parole_; and before the facts had been officially
communicated to the public that journal was busy with a campaign against
the war minister, based on the apprehension that, in conspiracy with the
_Juiverie_ and his republican colleagues, he might exert himself to
shield the traitor. Anti-Semitic feeling was now thoroughly aroused.
Panama had prepared the people to believe anything; and when it was
announced that a court-martial, sitting in secret, had convicted
Dreyfus, there was a howl of execration against the Jews from one end of
the country to the other, although the alleged crime of the convict and
the evidence by which it was supported were quite unknown. Dreyfus was
degraded and transported for life amid unparalleled scenes of public
excitement.

The Dreyfus Case registers the climax not only of French, but of
European anti-Semitism. It was the most ambitious and most unscrupulous
attempt yet made to prove the nationalist hypothesis of the
anti-Semites, and in its failure it afforded the most striking
illustration of the dangers of the whole movement by bringing France to
the verge of revolution. For a few months after the Dreyfus
court-martial there was a comparative lull; but the highly strung
condition of popular passion was illustrated by a violent debate on "The
Jewish Peril" in the Chamber of Deputies (25th April 1895), and by two
outrages with explosives at the Rothschild bank in Paris. Meanwhile the
family of Dreyfus, absolutely convinced of his innocence, were casting
about for the means of clearing his character and securing his
liberation. They were wealthy, and their activity unsettled the public
mind and aroused the apprehensions of the conspirators. Had the latter
known how to preserve silence, the mystery would perhaps have been yet
unsolved; but in their anxiety to allay all suspicions they made one
false step, which proved the beginning of their ruin. Through their
friends in the press they secured the publication of a facsimile of a
document known as the _Bordereau_--a list of documents supposed to be in
Dreyfus's handwriting and addressed apparently to the military attaché
of a foreign power, which was alleged to constitute the chief evidence
against the convict. It was hoped by this publication to put an end to
the doubts of the so-called Dreyfusards. The result, however, was only
to give them a clue on which they worked with remarkable ingenuity. To
prove that the _Bordereau_ was not in Dreyfus's handwriting was not
difficult. Indeed, its authorship was recognized almost on the day of
publication; but the Dreyfusards held their hands in order to make
assurance doubly sure by further evidence. Meanwhile one of the officers
of the general staff, Colonel Picquart, had convinced himself by an
examination of the _dossier_ of the trial that a gross miscarriage of
justice had taken place. On mentioning his doubts to his superiors, who
were animated partly by anti-Semitic feeling and partly by reluctance to
confess to a mistake, he was ordered to the Tunisian hinterland on a
dangerous expedition. Before leaving Paris, however, he took the
precaution to confide his discovery to his legal adviser. Harassed by
their anxieties, the conspirators made further communications to the
newspapers; and the government, questioned and badgered in parliament,
added to the revelations. The new disclosures, so far from stopping the
Dreyfusards, proved to them, among other things, that the conviction had
been partially based on documents which had not been communicated to the
counsel for the defence, and hence that the judges had been tampered
with by the ministry of war behind the prisoner's back. So far, too, as
these documents related to correspondence with foreign military
attachés, it was soon ascertained that they were forgeries. In this way
a terrible indictment was gradually drawn up against the ministry of
war. The first step was taken towards the end of 1897 by a brother of
Captain Dreyfus, who, in a letter to the minister of war, denounced
Major Esterhazy as the real author of the _Bordereau_. The authorities,
supported by parliament, declined to reopen the Dreyfus Case, but they
ordered a court-martial on Esterhazy, which was held with closed doors
and resulted in his acquittal. It now became clear that nothing short of
an appeal to public opinion and a full exposure of all the iniquities
that had been perpetrated would secure justice at the hands of the
military chiefs. On behalf of Dreyfus, Émile Zola, the eminent novelist,
formulated the case against the general staff of the army in an open
letter to the president of the republic, which by its dramatic
accusations startled the whole world. The letter was denounced as wild
and fantastic even by those who were in favour of revision. Zola was
prosecuted for libel and convicted, and had to fly the country; but the
agitation he had started was taken in hand by others, notably M.
Clémenceau, M. Reinach and M. Yves Guyot. In August 1898 their efforts
found their first reward. A re-examination of the documents in the case
by M. Cavaignac, then minister of war, showed that one was undoubtedly
forged. Colonel Henry, of the intelligence department of the war office,
then confessed that he had fabricated the document, and, on being sent
to Mont Valérien under arrest, cut his throat.

In spite of this damaging discovery the war office still persisted in
believing Dreyfus guilty, and opposed a fresh inquiry. It was supported
by three successive ministers of war, and apparently an overwhelming
body of public opinion. By this time the question of the guilt or
innocence of Dreyfus had become an altogether subsidiary issue. As in
Germany and Austria, the anti-Semitic crusade had passed into the hands
of the political parties. On the one hand the Radicals and Socialists,
recognizing the anti-republican aims of the agitators and alarmed by the
clerical predominance in the army, had thrown in their lot with the
Dreyfusards; on the other the reactionaries, anxious to secure the
support of the army, took the opposite view, denounced their opponents
as _sans patrie_, and declared that they were conspiring to weaken and
degrade the army in the face of the national enemy. The controversy was,
consequently, no longer for or against Dreyfus, but for or against the
army, and behind it was a life-or-death struggle between the republic
and its enemies. The situation became alarming. Rumours of military
plots filled the air. Powerful leagues for working up public feeling
were formed and organized; attempts to discredit the republic and
intimidate the government were made. The president was insulted; there
were tumults in the streets, and an attempt was made by M. Déroulède to
induce the military to march on the Elysée and upset the republic. In
this critical situation France, to her eternal honour, found men with
sufficient courage to do the right. The Socialists, by rallying to the
Radicals against the reactionaries, secured a majority for the defence
of the republic in parliament. Brisson's cabinet transmitted to the
court of cassation an application for the revision of the case against
Dreyfus; and that tribunal, after an elaborate inquiry, which fully
justified Zola's famous letter, quashed and annulled the proceedings of
the court-martial, and remitted the accused to another court-martial, to
be held at Rennes. Throughout these proceedings the military party
fought tooth and nail to impede the course of justice; and although the
innocence of Dreyfus had been completely established, it concentrated
all its efforts to secure a fresh condemnation of the prisoner at
Rennes. Popular passion was at fever heat, and it manifested itself in
an attack on M. Labori, one of the counsel for the defence, who was shot
and wounded on the eve of his cross-examination of the witnesses for the
prosecution. To the amazement and indignation of the whole world outside
France, the Rennes court-martial again found the prisoner guilty; but
all reliance on the conscientiousness of the verdict was removed by a
rider, which found "extenuating circumstances," and by a reduction of
the punishment to ten years' imprisonment, to which was added a
recommendation to mercy. The verdict was evidently an attempt at a
compromise, and the government resolved to advise the president of the
republic to pardon Dreyfus. This lame conclusion did not satisfy the
accused; but his innocence had been so clearly proved, and on political
grounds there were such urgent reasons for desiring a termination of the
affair, that it was accepted without protest by the majority of moderate
men.

The rehabilitation of Dreyfus, however, did not pass without another
effort on the part of the reactionaries to turn the popular passions
excited by the case to their own advantage. After the failure of
Déroulède's attempt to overturn the republic, the various Royalist and
Boulangist leagues, with the assistance of the anti-Semites, organized
another plot. This was discovered by the government, and the leaders
were arrested. Jules Guérin, secretary of the anti-Semitic league, shut
himself up in the league offices in the rue Chabrol, Paris, which had
been fortified and garrisoned by a number of his friends, armed with
rifles. For more than a month these anti-Semites held the authorities at
bay, and some 5000 troops were employed in the siege. The conspirators
were all tried by the senate, sitting as a high court, and Guérin was
sentenced to ten years' imprisonment. The evidence showed that the
anti-Semitic organization had taken an active part in the
anti-republican plot (see the report of the Commission d'Instruction in
the _Petit Temps_, 1st November 1899).

The government now resolved to strike at the root of the mischief by
limiting the power of the religious orders, and with this view a drastic
Association bill was introduced into the chambers. This anti-clerical
move provoked the wildest passions of the reactionaries, but it found an
overwhelming support in the elections of 1902 and the bill became law.
The war thus definitely reopened soon led to a revival of the Dreyfus
controversy. The nationalists flooded the country with incendiary
defamations of "the government of national treason," and Dreyfus on his
part loudly demanded a fresh trial. It was clear that conciliation and
compromise were useless. Early in 1905 M. Jaurès urged upon the chamber
that the demand of the Jewish officer should be granted if only to
tranquillize the country. The necessary _faits nouveaux_ were speedily
found by the minister of war, General André, and having been examined by
a special commission of revision were ordered to be transmitted to the
court of cassation for final adjudication. On the 12th of July 1906, the
court, all chambers united, gave its judgment. After a lengthy review of
the case it declared unanimously that the whole accusation against
Dreyfus had been disproved, and it quashed the judgment of the Rennes
court-martial _sans renvoi_. The explanation of the whole case is that
Esterhazy and Henry were the real culprits; that they had made a trade
of supplying the German government with military documents; and that
once the _Bordereau_ was discovered they availed themselves of the
anti-Jewish agitation to throw suspicion on Dreyfus.

Thus ended this famous case, to the relief of the whole country and with
the approval of the great majority of French citizens. Except a knot of
anti-Semitic monomaniacs all parties bowed loyally to the judgment of
the court of cassation. The government gave the fullest effect to the
judgment. Dreyfus and Picquart were restored to the active list of the
army with the ranks respectively of major and general of brigade.
Dreyfus was also created a knight of the Legion of Honour, and received
the decoration in public in the artillery pavilion of the military
school. Zola, to whose efforts the triumph of truth was chiefly due, had
not been spared to witness the final scene, but the chambers decided to
give his remains a last resting-place in the Pantheon. When three months
later M. Clémenceau formed his first cabinet he appointed General
Picquart minister of war. Nothing indeed was left undone to repair the
terrible series of wrongs which had grown out of the Dreyfus case.
Nevertheless its destructive work could not be wholly healed. For over
ten years it had been a nightmare to France, and it now modified the
whole course of French history. In the ruin of the French Church, which
owed its disestablishment very largely to the Dreyfus conspiracy, may be
read the most eloquent warning against the demoralizing madness of
anti-Semitism.

In sympathy with the agitation in France there has been a similar
movement in Algeria, where the European population have long resented
the admission of the native Jews to the rights of French citizenship.
The agitation has been marked by much violence, and most of the
anti-Semitic deputies in the French parliament, including M. Drumont,
have found constituencies in Algeria. As the local anti-Semites are
largely Spaniards and Levantine riff-raff, the agitation has not the
peculiar nationalist bias which characterizes continental anti-Semitism.
Before the energy of the authorities it has lately shown signs of
subsiding.

  Great Britain, &c.

While the main activity of anti-Semitism has manifested itself in
Germany, Russia, Rumania, Austria-Hungary and France, its vibratory
influences have been felt in other countries when conditions favourable
to its extension have presented themselves. In England more than one
attempt to acclimatize the doctrines of Marr and Treitschke has been
made. The circumstance that at the time of the rise of German
anti-Semitism a premier of Hebrew race, Lord Beaconsfield, was in power
first suggested the Jewish bogey to English political extremists. The
Eastern crisis of 1876-1878, which was regarded by the Liberal party as
primarily a struggle between Christianity, as represented by Russia, and
a degrading Semitism, as represented by Turkey, accentuated the
anti-Jewish feeling, owing to the anti-Russian attitude adopted by the
government. Violent expression to the ancient prejudices against the
Jews was given by Sir J.G. Tollemache Sinclair (_A Defence of Russia_,
1877). Mr T.P. O'Connor, in a life of Lord Beaconsfield (1878), pictured
him as the instrument of the Jewish people, "moulding the whole policy
of Christendom to Jewish aims." Professor Goldwin Smith, in several
articles in the _Nineteenth Century_ (1878, 1881 and 1882), sought to
synthetize the growing anti-Jewish feeling by adopting the nationalist
theories of the German anti-Semites. This movement did not fail to find
an equivocal response in the speeches of some of the leading Liberal
statesmen; but on the country generally it produced no effect. It was
revived when the persecutions in Russia threatened England with a great
influx of Polish Jews, whose mode of life was calculated to lower the
standard of living in the industries in which they were employed, and it
has left its trace in the anti-alien legislation of 1905. In 1883
Stöcker visited London, but received a very unflattering reception.
Abortive attempts to acclimatize anti-Semitism have also been made in
Switzerland, Belgium, Greece and the United States.

Anti-Semitism made a great deal of history during the thirty years up to
1908, but has left no permanent mark of a constructive kind on the
social and political evolution of Europe. It is the fruit of a great
ethnographic and political error, and it has spent itself in political
intrigues of transparent dishonesty. Its racial doctrine is at best a
crude hypothesis: its nationalist theory has only served to throw into
striking relief the essentially economic bases of modern society, while
its political activity has revealed the vulgarity and ignorance which
constitute its main sources of strength. So far from injuring the Jews,
it has really given Jewish racial separatism a new lease of life. Its
extravagant accusations, as in the Tisza Eszlar and Dreyfus cases, have
resulted in the vindication of the Jewish character. Its agitation
generally, coinciding with the revival of interest in Jewish history,
has helped to transfer Jewish solidarity from a religious to a racial
basis. The bond of a common race, vitalized by a new pride in Hebrew
history and spurred on to resistance by the insults of the anti-Semites,
has given a new spirit and a new source of strength to Judaism at a
moment when the approximation of ethical systems and the revolt against
dogma were sapping its essentially religious foundations. In the whole
history of Judaism, perhaps, there have been no more numerous or
remarkable instances of reversions to the faith than in the period in
question. The reply of the Jews to anti-Semitism has taken two
interesting practical forms. In the first place there is the so-called
Zionist movement, which is a kind of Jewish nationalism and is vitiated
by the same errors that distinguish its anti-Semitic analogue (see
ZIONISM). In the second place, there is a movement represented by the
Maccabaeans' Society in London, which seeks to unite the Jewish people
in an effort to raise the Jewish character and to promote a higher
consciousness of the dignity of the race. It lays no stress on
orthodoxy, but welcomes all who strive to render Jewish conduct an
adequate reply to the theories of the anti-Semites. Both these movements
are elements of fresh vitality to Judaism, and they are probably
destined to produce important fruit in future years. A splendid spirit
of generosity has also been displayed by the Jewish community in
assisting and relieving the victims of the Jew-haters. Besides countless
funds raised by public subscription, Baron de Hirsch founded a colossal
scheme for transplanting persecuted Jews to new countries under new
conditions of life, and endowed it with no less a sum than £9,000,000
(see HIRSCH, MAURICE DE).

Though anti-Semitism has been unmasked and discredited, it is to be
feared that its history is not yet at an end. While there remain in
Russia and Rumania over six millions of Jews who are being
systematically degraded, and who periodically overflow the western
frontier, there must continue to be a Jewish question in Europe; and
while there are weak governments, and ignorant and superstitious
elements in the enfranchized classes of the countries affected, that
question will seek to play a part in politics.

  LITERATURE.--No impartial history of modern anti-Semitism has yet been
  written. The most comprehensive works on the subject, _Israel among
  the Nations_, by A. Leroy-Beaulieu (1895), and _L'Antisémitisme, son
  histoire et ses causes_, by Bernard Lazare (1894), are collections of
  studies rather than histories. M. Lazare's work will be found most
  useful by the student on account of its detached standpoint and its
  valuable bibliographical notes. A good list of works relating to
  Jewish ethnography will be found at the end of M. Isidor Loeb's
  valuable article, "Juifs," in the _Dictionnaire universel de
  géographie_ (1884). To these should be added, Adolf Jellinek, _Der
  Jüdische Stamm_ (1869); Chwolson, _Die semitischen Volker_ (1872);
  Nossig, _Materialien zur Statistik_ (1887); Jacobs, _Jewish
  Statistics_ (1891); and Andree, _Zur Volkskunde der Juden_ (1881). A
  bibliography of the Jewish question from 1875 to 1884 has been
  published by Mr Joseph Jacobs (1885). Useful additions and
  rectifications will be found in the _Jewish World_, 11th September
  1885. During the period since 1885 the anti-Semitic movement has
  produced an immense pamphlet literature. Some of these productions
  have already been referred to; others will be found in current
  bibliographies under the names of the personages mentioned, such as
  Stöcker, Ahlwardt, &c. On the Russian persecutions, besides the works
  quoted by Jacobs, see the pamphlet issued by the Russo-Jewish
  Committee in 1890, and the annual reports of the Russo-Jewish Mansion
  House Fund; _Les Juifs de Russie_ (Paris, 1891); _Report of the
  Commissioners of Immigration upon the Causes which incite Immigration
  to the United States_ (Washington, 1892); _The New Exodus_, by Harold
  Frederic (1892); _Les Juifs russes_, by Leo Errera (Brussels, 1893).
  The most valuable collection of facts relating to the persecutions of
  1881-1882 are to be found in the _Feuilles Jaunes_ (52 nos.), compiled
  and circulated for the information of the European press by the
  Alliance Israélite of Paris. Complete collections are very scarce. For
  the struggle during the past decade the _Russische Correspondenz_ of
  Berlin should be consulted, together with its French and English
  editions. See also the publications of the _Bund_ (Geneva; Imprimerie
  Israélite); Séménoff, _The Russian Government and the Massacres_, and
  _Quarterly Review_, October 1906. On the Rumanian question, see
  Bluntschli, _Roumania and the Legal Status of the Jews_ (London,
  1879); _Wir Juden_ (Zürich, 1883); Schloss, _The Persecution of the
  Jews in Roumania_ (London, 1885); Schloss, _Notes of Information_
  (1886); Sincerus, _Juifs en Roumanie_ (London, 1901); Plotke, _Die
  rumanischen Juden unter dem Fürsten u. Konig Karl_ (1901); Dehn,
  _Diplomatic u. Hochfinanz in der rumanischen Judenfrage_ (1901);
  Conybeare, "Roumania as a Persecuting Power," _Nat. Rev_., February
  1901. On Hungary and the Tisza Eszlar Case, see (besides the
  references in Jacobs) Nathan, _Der Prozess van Tisza Eszlar_ (Berlin,
  1892). On this case and the Blood Accusation generally, see Wright,
  "The Jews and the Malicious Charge of Human Sacrifice," _Nineteenth
  Century_, 1883. The origins of the Austrian agitation are dealt with
  by Nitti, _Catholic Socialism_ (1895). This work, though inclining to
  anti-Semitism, should be consulted for the Christian Socialist
  elements in the whole continental agitation. The most valuable source
  of information on the Austrian movement is the _Österreichische
  Wochenschrift_, edited by Dr Bloch. See also pamphlets and speeches by
  the anti-Semitic leaders, Liechtenstein, Lueger, Schoenerer, &c. The
  case of the French anti-Semites is stated by E. Drumont in his _France
  juive_. and other works; the other side by Isidor Loeb, Bernard
  Lazare, Leonce Reynaud, &c. Of the Dreyfus Case there is an enormous
  literature: see especially the reports of the Zola and Picquart
  trials, the revision case before the Court of Cassation, the
  proceedings of the Rennes court-martial, and the final judgment of the
  Court of Cassation printed in full in the _Figaro_, July 15, 1906;
  also Reinach, _Histoire de l'affaire Dreyfus_ (Paris, 1908, 6 vols.),
  and the valuable series of volumes by Captain Paul Marin, MM.
  Clémenceau, Lazare, Yves Guyot, Paschal Grousset, Urbain Gohier, de
  Haime, de Pressensé, and the remarkable letters of Dreyfus (_Lettres
  d'un innocent_). An English history of the case was published by F.C.
  Conybeare (1898), whose articles and those of Sir Godfrey Lushington
  and L.J. Maxse in the _National Review_, 1897-1900, will be found
  invaluable by the student. On the Algerian question, see M. Wahl in
  the _Revue des études juives_; L. Forest, _Naturalisation des
  Israélites algériens_; and E. Audinet in the _Revue générale de droit
  international publique_, 1897, No. 4. On the history of the
  anti-Semitic movement generally, see the annual reports of the
  Alliance Israélite of Paris and the Anglo-Jewish Association of
  London, also the annual summaries published at the end of the Jewish
  year by the _Jewish Chronicle_ of London. The connexion of the
  movement with general party politics must be followed in the
  newspapers. The present writer has worked with a collection of
  newspaper cuttings numbering several thousands and ranging over thirty
  years.     (L. W.)