ANTIQUARY, a person who devotes himself to the study of ancient learning
and "antiques," i.e. ancient objects of art or science. The London
Society of Antiquaries was formed in the 18th century to promote the
study of antiquities. As early as 1572 a society had been founded by
Bishop Matthew Parker, Sir Robert Cotton, William Camden and others for
the preservation of national antiquities. This body existed till 1604,
when it fell under suspicion of being political in its aims, and was
abolished by James I. Papers read at their meetings are preserved in the
Cottonian library and were printed by Thomas Hearne in 1720 under the
title _A Collection of Curious Discourses_, a second edition appearing
in 1771. In 1707 a number of English antiquaries began to hold regular
meetings for the discussion of their hobby and in 1717 the Society of
Antiquaries was formally reconstituted, finally receiving a charter from
George II. in 1751. In 1780 George III. granted the society apartments
in Somerset House, Strand. The society is governed by a council of
twenty and a president who is _ex officio_ a trustee of the British
Museum. The present headquarters of the society are at Burlington House,
Piccadilly.

The Society of Antiquaries of Scotland was founded in 1780, and has the
management of a large national antiquarian museum in Edinburgh. In
Ireland a society was founded in 1849 called the Kilkenny Archaeological
Society, holding its meetings at Kilkenny. In 1869 its name was changed
to the Royal Historical and Archaeological Association of Ireland, and
in 1890 to the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, its office being
transferred to Dublin. In France _La Société Nationale des Antiquaires
de France_ was formed in 1814 by the reconstruction of the _Acadêmie
Celtique_, which had existed since 1805. The American Antiquarian
Society was founded in 1812, with its headquarters at Worcester, Mass.
It has a library of upwards of 100,000 volumes and its transactions have
been published bi-annually since 1849. In Germany the _Gesamtverein der
Deutschen Geschichtsund Altertumsvereine_ was founded in 1852. _La
Société Royale des Antiquaires du Nord_ at Copenhagen is among the best
known of European antiquarian societies.