ANTOFAGASTA, a town and port of northern Chile and capital of the
Chilean province of the same name, situated about 768 m. N. of
Valparaiso in 23° 38' 39" S. lat. and 70° 24' 39" W. long. Pop. (est.
1902) 16,084. Antofagasta is the seaport for a railway running to Oruro,
Bolivia, and is the only available outlet for the trade of the
south-western departments of that republic. The smelting works for the
neighbouring silver mines are located here, and a thriving trade with
the inland mining towns is carried on. The town was founded in 1870 as a
shipping port for the recently discovered silver mines of that vicinity,
and belonged to Bolivia until 1879, when it was occupied by a Chilean
military force.

The province of ANTOFAGASTA has an area of 46,611 sq. m. lying within
the desert of Atacama and between the provinces of Tarapacá and Atacama.
It is rich in saline and other mineral deposits, the important Caracoles
silver mines being about 90 m. north-east of the port of Antofagasta.
Like the other provinces of this region, Antofagasta produces for export
copper, silver, silver ores, lead, nitrate of soda, borax and salt.
Iron and manganese ores are also found. Besides Antofagasta the
principal towns are Taltal, Mejillones, Cobija (the old capital) and
Tocopilla. Up to 1879 the province belonged to Bolivia, and was known as
the department of Atacama, or the Litoral. It fell into the possession
of Chile in the war of 1879-82, and was definitely ceded to that
republic in 1885.