ANTONELLO DA MESSINA (c. 1430-1479), Italian painter, was probably born
at Messina about the beginning of the 15th century, and laboured at his
art for some time in his native country. Happening to see at Naples a
painting in oil by Jan Van Eyck, belonging to Alphonso of Aragon, he was
struck by the peculiarity and value of the new method, and set out for
the Netherlands to acquire a knowledge of the process from Van Eyck's
disciples. He spent some time there in the prosecution of his art;
returned with his secret to Messina about 1465; probably visited Milan;
removed to Venice in 1472, where he painted for the Council of Ten; and
died there in the middle of February 1479 (see Venturi's article in
Thieme-Becker, _Kunstlerlexikon_, 1907). His style is remarkable for its
union--not always successful--of Italian simplicity with Flemish love of
detail. His subjects are frequently single figures, upon the complete
representation of which he bestows his utmost skill. There are
extant--besides a number more or less dubious--twenty authentic
productions, consisting of renderings of "Ecce Homo," Madonnas, saints,
and half-length portraits, many of them painted on wood. The finest of
all is said to be the nameless picture of a man in the Berlin museum.
The National Gallery, London, has three works by him, including the "St
Jerome in his Study." Antonello exercised an important influence on
Italian painting, not only by the introduction of the Flemish invention,
but also by the transmission of Flemish tendencies.