ANTRIM, RANDAL MACDONNELL, 1ST MARQUESS of (1609-1683), son of the 1st
earl of Antrim, was born in 1609 and educated as a Roman Catholic. He
travelled abroad, and on his return in 1634 went to court, next year
marrying Katherine Manners, widow of the 1st duke of Buckingham, and
living on her fortune for some years in great splendour. In 1639, on the
outbreak of the Scottish war, he initiated a scheme of raising a force
in Ireland to attack Argyll in Scotland and recover Kintyre (or
Cantire), a district formerly possessed by his family; but the plan,
discouraged and ridiculed by Strafford, miscarried.[1] Soon afterwards
he returned to Ireland, and sought in 1641 to create a diversion,
together with Ormonde, for Charles I. against the parliament. He joined
in his schemes Lord Slane and Sir Phelim O'Neill, later leaders of the
rebellion, but on the outbreak of the rebellion in the autumn he
dissociated himself from his allies and retired to his castle at
Dunluce. His suspicious conduct, however, and his Roman Catholicism,
caused him to be regarded as an enemy by the English party. In May 1642
he was captured at Dunluce Castle by the parliamentary general Robert
Munro, and imprisoned at Carrickfergus. Escaping thence he joined the
queen at York; and subsequently, having proceeded to Ireland to
negotiate a cessation of hostilities, he was again captured with his
papers in May 1643 and confined at Carrickfergus, thence once more
escaping and making his way to Kilkenny, the headquarters of the Roman
Catholic confederation. He returned to Oxford in December with a scheme
for raising 10,000 Irish for service in England and 2000 to join
Montrose in Scotland, which through the influence of the duchess of
Buckingham secured the consent of the king. On the 26th of January 1644
Antrim was created a marquess. He returned to Kilkenny in February, took
the oath of association, and was made a member of the council and
lieutenant-general of the forces of the Catholic confederacy. The
confederacy, however, giving him no support in his projects, he threw up
his commission, and with Ormonde's help despatched about 1600 men in
June to Montrose's assistance in Scotland, subsequently returning to
Oxford and being sent by the king in 1645 with letters for the queen at
St Germains. He proceeded thence to Flanders and fitted out two frigates
with military stores, which he brought to the prince of Wales at
Falmouth. He visited Cork and afterwards in July 1646 joined his troops
in Scotland, with the hope of expelling Argyll from Kintyre; but he was
obliged to retire by order of the king, and returning to Ireland threw
himself into the intrigues between the various factions. In 1647 he was
appointed with two others by the confederacy to negotiate a treaty with
the prince of Wales in France, and though he anticipated his companions
by starting a week before them, he failed to secure the coveted
lord-lieutenancy, which was confirmed to Ormonde. He now ceased to
support the Roman Catholics or the king's cause; opposed the treaty
between Ormonde and the confederates; supported the project of union
between O'Neill and the parliament; and in 1649 entered into
communications with Cromwell, for whom he performed various services,
though there appears no authority to support Carte's story that Antrim
was the author of a forged agreement for the betrayal of the king's army
by Lord Inchiquin.[2] Subsequently he joined Ireton, and was present at
the siege of Carlow. He returned to England in December 1650, and in
lieu of his confiscated estate received a pension of £500 and later of
£800, together with lands in Mayo. At the Restoration Antrim was
excluded from the Act of Oblivion on account of his religion, and on
presenting himself at court was imprisoned in the Tower, subsequently
being called before the lords justices in Ireland. In 1663 he succeeded,
in spite of Ormonde's opposition, in securing a decree of innocence from
the commissioners of claims. This raised an outcry from the adventurers
who had been put in possession of his lands, and who procured a fresh
trial; but Antrim appealed to the king, and through the influence of the
queen mother obtained a pardon, his estates being restored to him by the
Irish, Act of Explanation in 1665.[3] Antrim died on the 3rd of February
1683. He is described by Clarendon as of handsome appearance but "of
excessive pride and vanity and of a marvellous weak and narrow
understanding." He married secondly Rose, daughter of Sir Henry O'Neill,
but had no children, being succeeded in the earldom by his brother
Alexander, 3rd earl of Antrim.

  See _Hibernia Anglicana_, by R. Cox (1689-1690) esp. app. xlix. vol.
  ii. 206; _History of the Irish Confederation_, by J.T. Gilbert
  (1882-1891); _Aphorismical Discovery_ (Irish Archaeological Society,
  1879-1880); _Thomason Tracts_ (Brit. Mus.), E 59 (18), 149 (12), 138
  (7), 153 (19), 61 (23); _Murder will out, or the King's Letter
  justifying the Marquess of Antrim_ (1689); _Hist. MSS. Comm.
  Series--MSS. of Marq. of Ormonde._     (P. C. Y.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Strafford's _Letters_, ii. 300.

  [2] _Life of Ormonde_, iii. 509; see also _Cal. of State Papers,
    Ireland, 1660-1662_, pp. 294, 217; _Cal. of Clarendon St. Pap._, ii.
    69, and Gardiner's _Commonwealth_, i. 153.

  [3] Hallam, _Const. Hist._, iii. 396 (ed. 1855).