ANTRIM, a market-town in the west of the county Antrim, Ireland, in the
south parliamentary division, on the banks of the Six-Mile Water, half a
mile from Lough Neagh, in a beautiful and fertile valley. Pop. (1901)
1826. It is 21¾ m. north-west of Belfast by the Northern Counties
(Midland) railway, and is also the terminus of a branch of the Great
Northern railway from Lisburn. There is nothing in the town specially
worthy of notice, but the environs, including Shane's Castle and Antrim
Castle, possess features of considerable interest. About a mile from the
town is one of the most perfect of the round towers of Ireland, 93 ft.
high and 50 in circumference at the base. It stands in the grounds of
Steeple, a neighbouring seat, where is also the "Witches' Stone," a
prehistoric monument. A battle was fought near Antrim between the
English and Irish in the reign of Edward III.; and in 1642 a naval
engagement took place on Lough Neagh, for Viscount Massereene and
Ferrard (who founded Antrim Castle in 1662) had a right to maintain a
fighting fleet on the lough. On the 7th of June 1798 there was a smart
action in the town between the king's troops and a large body of rebels,
in which the latter were defeated, and Lord O'Neill mortally wounded.
Before the Union Antrim returned two members to parliament by virtue of
letters patent granted in 1666 by Charles II. There are manufactures of
paper, linen, and woollen cloth. The government is in the hands of town
commissioners.