ANTRIM, RANDAL MACDONNELL, 1ST EARL OF (d. 1636), called "Arranach,"
having been brought up in the Scottish island of Arran by the Hamiltons,
was the 4th son of Sorley Boy MacDonnell (q.v.), and of Mary, daughter
of Conn O'Neill, 1st earl of Tyrone. He fought at first against the
English government, participating in his brother James's victory over
Sir John Chichester at Carrickfergus in November 1597, and joining in
O'Neill's rebellion in 1600. But on the 16th of December he signed
articles with Sir Arthur Chichester and was granted protection; in 1601
he became head of his house by his elder brother's death, his pardon
being confirmed to him; and in 1602 he submitted to Lord Mountjoy and
was knighted. On the accession of James I. in 1603 he obtained a grant
of the Route and the Glynns (Glens) districts, together with the island
of Rathlin, and remained faithful to the government in spite of the
unpopularity he thereby incurred among his kinsmen, who conspired to
depose him. In 1607 he successfully defended himself against the charge
of disloyalty on the occasion of the flight of the earls of Tyrone and
Tyrconnell, and rendered services to the government by settling and
civilizing his districts, being well received the following year by
James in London. In 1618 he was created Viscount Dunluce, and
subsequently he was appointed a privy councillor and lord-lieutenant of
the county of Antrim. On the 12th of December 1620 he was created earl
of Antrim. In 1621 he was charged with harbouring Roman Catholic
priests, confessed his offence and was pardoned. He offered his
assistance in 1625 during the prospect of a Spanish invasion, but was
still regarded as a person that needed watching. His arbitrary conduct
in Ireland in 1627 was suggested as a fit subject for examination by the
Star Chamber, but his fidelity to the government was strictly maintained
to the last. In 1631 he was busy repairing Protestant churches, and in
1634 he attended the Irish parliament. He made an important agreement in
1635 for the purchase from James Campbell, Lord Cantire, of the lordship
of Cantire, or Kintyre, of which the MacDonnells had been dispossessed
in 1600 by Argyll; but his possession was successfully opposed by Lord
Lorne. He died on the 10th of December 1636. Antrim married Alice,
daughter of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, by whom, besides six
daughters, he had Randal, 2nd earl and 1st marquess of Antrim (q.v.),
and Alexander, 3rd earl. Three other sons, Maurice, Francis and James,
were probably illegitimate. The earldom has continued in the family down
to the present day, the 11th earl (b. 1851) succeeding in 1869.

  See also _An Historical Account of the MacDonnells of Antrim_, by G.
  Hill (1873).