APATURIA ([Greek: Apatouria]), an ancient Greek festival held annually
by all the Ionian towns except Ephesus and Colophon (Herodotus i. 147).
At Athens it took place in the month of Pyanepsion (October to
November), and lasted three days, on which occasion the various
phratries (i.e. clans) of Attica met to discuss their affairs. The name
is a slightly modified form of [Greek: apatoria = hamapatoria,
homopatoria], the festival of "common relationship." The ancient
etymology associated it with [Greek: apatê] (deceit), a legend existing
that the festival originated in 1100 B.C. in commemoration of a single
combat between a certain Melanthus, representing King Thymoetes of
Attica, and King Xanthus of Boeotia, in which Melanthus successfully
threw his adversary off his guard by crying that a man in a black goat's
skin (identified with Dionysus) was helping him (Schol. Aristophanes,
_Acharnians_, 146). On the first day of the festival, called Dorpia or
Dorpeia, banquets were held towards evening at the meeting-place of the
phratries or in the private houses of members. On the second, Anarrhysis
(from [Greek: anarruein], to draw back the victim's head), a sacrifice
of oxen was offered at the public cost to Zeus Phratrius and Athena. On
the third day, Cureotis ([Greek: koureotis]), children born since the
last festival were presented by their fathers or guardians to the
assembled phratores, and, after an oath had been taken as to their
legitimacy and the sacrifice of a goat or a sheep, their names were
inscribed in the register. The name [Greek: koureotis] is derived either
from [Greek: kouros], that is, the day of the young, or less probably
from [Greek: keiro], because on this occasion young people cut their
hair and offered it to the gods. The victim was called [Greek: meion].
On this day also it was the custom for boys still at school to declaim
pieces of poetry, and to receive prizes (Plato, _Timaeus_, 21 B).
According to Hesychius these three days of the festival were followed by
a fourth, called [Greek: epibda], but this is merely a general term for
the day after any festival.