APELLA, the official title of the popular assembly at Sparta,
corresponding to the ecclesia in most other Greek states. Every full
citizen who had completed his thirtieth year was entitled to attend the
meetings, which, according to Lycurgus's ordinance, must be held at the
time of each full moon within the boundaries of Sparta. They had in all
probability taken place originally in the Agora, but were later
transferred to the neighbouring building known as the Skias (Paus. iii.
12. 10). The presiding officers were at first the kings, but in
historical times the ephors, and the voting was conducted by shouts; if
the president was doubtful as to the majority of voices, a division was
taken and the votes were counted. Lycurgus had ordained that the apella
must simply accept or reject the proposals submitted to it, and though
this regulation fell into neglect, it was practically restored by the
law of Theopompus and Polydorus which empowered the kings and elders to
set aside any "crooked" decision of the people (Plut. _Lycurg._ 6). In
later times, too, the actual debate was almost, if not wholly, confined
to the kings, elders, ephors and perhaps the other magistrates. The
apella voted on peace and war, treaties and foreign policy in general:
it decided which of the kings should conduct a campaign and settled
questions of disputed succession to the throne: it elected elders,
ephors and other magistrates, emancipated helots and perhaps voted on
legal proposals. There is a single reference (Xen. _Hell._ iii. 3. 8) to
a "small assembly" ([Greek: ê mikra kaloumenê ekklêsia]) at Sparta, but
nothing is known as to its nature or competence. The term apella does
not occur in extant Spartan inscriptions, though two decrees of Gythium
belonging to the Roman period refer to the [Greek: megalai apellai] (Le
Bas-Foucart, _Voyage archéologique_, ii., Nos. 242a, 243).

  See G. Gilbert, _Constitutional Antiquities of Sparta and Athens_
  (Eng, trans., 1895), pp. 49 ff.; _Studien zur altspartanischen
  Geschichte_ (Göttingen, 1872), pp. 131 ff.; G.F. Schömann,
  _Antiquities of Greece: The State_ (Eng. trans., 1880), pp. 234 ff.;
  _De ecdesiis Lacedaemoniorum_ (Griefswald, 1836) [= _Opusc. academ._
  i. pp. 87 ff.]; C.O. Müller, _History and Antiquities of the Doric
  Race_ (Eng. trans., 2nd ed. 1839), book iii. ch. 5, §§ 8-10; G.
  Busolt, _Die griechischen Staats- und Rechtsaltertümer_, 1887 (in Iwan
  Müller's _Handbuch der klassischen Altertumsiuissenschaft_, iv. 1), §
  90; _Griechische Geschichte_ (2nd ed.), i. p. 552 ff.     (M. N. T.)