APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE. The history of the earlier usage of the term
"Apocrypha" (from [Greek: apokruptein], to hide) is not free from
obscurity. We shall therefore enter at once on a short account of the
origin of this literature in Judaism, of its adoption by early
Christianity, of the various meanings which the term "apocryphal"
assumed in the course of its history, and having so done we shall
proceed to classify and deal with the books that belong to this
literature. The word most generally denotes writings which claimed to
be, or were by certain sects regarded as, sacred scriptures although
excluded from the canonical scriptures.

_Apocrypha in Judaism._--Certain circles in Judaism, as the Essenes in
Palestine (Josephus, _B.J._ ii. 8. 7) and the Therapeutae (Philo, _De
Vita Contempl._ ii. 475, ed. Mangey) in Egypt possessed a secret
literature. But such literature was not confined to the members of these
communities, but had been current among the Chasids and their successors
the Pharisees.[1] To this literature belong essentially the apocalypses
which were published in fast succession from Daniel onwards. These works
bore, perforce, the names of ancient Hebrew worthies in order to procure
them a hearing among the writers' real contemporaries. To reconcile
their late appearance with their claims to primitive antiquity the
alleged author is represented as "shutting up and sealing" (Dan. xii. 4,
9) the book, until the time of its fulfilment had arrived; for that it
was not designed for his own generation but for far-distant ages (1
Enochi. 2, cviii. 1.; Ass. Mos. i. 16, 17). It is not improbable that
with many Jewish enthusiasts this literature was more highly treasured
than the canonical scriptures. Indeed, we have a categorical statement
to this effect in 4 Ezra xiv. 44 sqq., which tells how Ezra was inspired
to dictate the sacred scriptures which had been destroyed in the
overthrow of Jerusalem: "In forty days they wrote ninety-four books: and
it came to pass when the forty days were fulfilled that the Highest
spake, saying: the first that thou hast written publish openly that the
worthy and unworthy may read it; but keep the seventy last that thou
mayst deliver them only to such as be wise among the people; for in them
is the spring of understanding, the fountain of wisdom and the stream of
knowledge." Such esoteric books are apocryphal in the original
conception of the term. In due course the Jewish authorities were forced
to draw up a canon or book of sacred scriptures, and mark them off from
those which claimed to be such without justification. The true
scriptures, according to the Jewish canon (Yad. iii. 5; Toseph. Yad. ii.
3), were those which defiled the hands of such as touched them. But
other scholars, such as Zahn, Schürer, Porter, state that the secret
books with which we have been dealing formed a class by themselves and
were called "Genuizim" [Hebrew: gnazim], and that this name and idea
passed from Judaism over into the Greek, and that [Greek: apokrypha
biblia] is a translation of [Hebrew: sfarim gnuzim]. But the Hebrew verb
does not mean "to bide" but "to store away," and is only used of things
in themselves precious. Moreover, the phrase is unknown in Talmudic
literature. The derivation of this idea from Judaism has therefore not
yet been established. Whether the Jews had any distinct name for these
esoteric works we do not know. For writings that stood wholly without
the pale of sacred books such as the books of heretics or Samaritans
they used the designation Hisonim, Sanh. x. 1 ([Hebrew: sfarim hizonim]
and [Hebrew: sifrei haminim]). To this class in later times even Sirach
was relegated, and indeed all books not included in the canon (Midr. r.
Num. 14 and on Koheleth xii. 12; cf. Jer. Sabb. 16).[2] In Aqiba's time
Sirach and other apocryphal books were not reckoned among the Hisonim;
for Sirach was largely quoted by rabbis in Palestine till the 3rd
century A.D.

_Apocrypha in Christianity._--Christianity as it springs from its
Founder had no secret or esoteric teaching. It was essentially the
revelation or manifestation of the truth of God. But as Christianity
took its origin from Judaism, it is not unnatural that a large body of
Jewish ideas was incorporated in the system of Christian thought. The
bulk of these in due course underwent transformation either complete or
partial, but there was always a residuum of incongruous and inconsistent
elements existing side by side with the essential truths of
Christianity. This was no isolated phenomenon; for in every progressive
period of the history of religion we have on the one side the doctrine
of God advancing in depth and fulness: on the other we have
cosmological, eschatological and other survivals, which, however
justifiable in earlier stages, are in unmistakable antagonism with the
theistic beliefs of the time. The eschatology of a nation--and the most
influential portion of Jewish and Christian apocrypha are
eschatological--is always the last part of their religion to experience
the transforming power of new ideas and new facts.

Now the current religious literature of Judaism outside the canon was
composed of apocryphal books, the bulk of which bore an apocalyptic
character, and dealt with the coming of the Messianic kingdom. These
naturally became the popular religious books of the rising
Jewish-Christian communities, and were held by them in still higher
esteem, if possible, than by the Jews. Occasionally these Jewish
writings were re-edited or adapted to their new readers by Christian
additions, but on the whole it was found sufficient to submit them to a
system of reinterpretation in order to make them testify to the truth of
Christianity and foreshadow its ultimate destinies. Christianity,
moreover, moved by the same apocalyptic tendency as Judaism, gave birth
to new Christian apocryphs, though, in the case of most of them, the
subject matter was to a large extent traditional and derived from Jewish
sources.

Another prolific source of apocryphal gospels, acts and apocalypses was
Gnosticism. While the characteristic features of apocalyptic literature
were derived from Judaism, those of Gnosticism sprang partly from Greek
philosophy, partly from oriental religions. They insisted on an
allegorical interpretation of the apostolic writings: they alleged
themselves to be the guardians of a secret apostolic tradition and laid
claim to prophetic inspiration. With them, as with the bulk of the
Christians of the 1st and 2nd centuries, apocryphal books as such were
highly esteemed. They were so designated by those who valued them. It
was not till later times that the term became one of reproach.

We have remarked above that the Jewish apocrypha--especially the
apocalyptic section and the host of Christian apocryphs--became the
ordinary religious literature of the early Christians. And this is not
strange seeing that of the former such abundant use was made by the
writers of the New Testament.[3] Thus Jude quotes the Book of Enoch by
name, while undoubted use of this book appears in the four gospels and 1
Peter. The influence of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs is still
more apparent in the Pauline Epistles and the Gospels, and the same
holds true of Jubilees and the Assumption of Moses, though in a very
slight degree. The genuineness and inspiration of Enoch were believed in
by the writer of the Ep. of Barnabas, Irenaeus, Tertullian and Clement
of Alexandria. But the high position which apocryphal books occupied in
the first two centuries was undermined by a variety of influences. All
claims to the possession of a secret tradition were denied (Irenaeus ii.
27. 2, iii. 2. 1, 3. 1; Tertullian, _Praescript._ 22-27): true
inspiration was limited to the apostolic age, and universal acceptance
by the church was required as a proof of apostolic authorship. Under the
action of such principles apocryphal books tended to pass into the class
of spurious and heretical writings.

_The Term "Apocryphal."_--Turning now to the consideration of the word
"apocryphal" itself, we find that in its earliest use it was applied in
a laudatory sense to writings,'(1) which were kept secret because they
were the vehicles of esoteric knowledge which was too profound or too
sacred to be imparted to any save the initiated. Thus it occurs in a
magical book of Moses, which has been edited from a Leiden papyrus of
the 3rd or 4th century by Dieterich (Abraxas, 109). This book, which may
be as old as the 1st century, is entitled: "A holy and secret Book of
Moses, called eighth, or holy" ([Greek: Mouseos iera biblos apokryphos
epikaloumenê ogdoê ê hagia]). The disciples of the Gnostic Prodicus
boasted (Clem. Alex. _Strom._ i. 15. 69) that they possessed the secret
([Greek: aprokryphous]) books of Zoroaster. 4 Ezra is in its author's
view a secret work whose value was greater than that of the canonical
scriptures (xiv. 44 sqq.) because of its transcendent revelations of the
future. It is in a like laudatory meaning that Gregory reckons the New
Testament apocalypse as [Greek: en apokryphois] (_Orátio in suam
ordinationem_, iii. 549, ed. Migne; cf. Epiphanius, _Haer._ li. 3). The
word enjoyed high consideration among the Gnostics (cf. Acts of Thomas,
10, 27, 44). (2) But the word was applied to writings that were kept
from public circulation not because of their transcendent, but of, their
secondary or questionable value. Thus Origen distinguishes between
writings which were read by the churches and apocryphal writings;
[Greek: graphê mê pheromenê men en tois koinois kai dedêmosieumenois
bibliois eikos d oti en apokryphois pheromenê] (Origen's _Comm. in
Matt._, x. 18, on Matt. xiii. 57, ed. Lommatzsch iii. 49 sqq.). Cf.
_Epist. ad Africam_, ix. (Lommatzsch xvii. 31): Euseb. _H.E._ ii. 23,
25; iii. 3, 6. See Zahn, _Gesch. Kanons_, i. 126 sqq. Thus the meaning
of [Greek: apokryphros] is here practically equivalent to "excluded from
the public use of the church," and prepares the way for the third and
unfavourable sense of this word. (3) The word came finally to mean what
is false, spurious, bad, heretical. If we may trust the text, this
meaning appears in Origen (_Prolog, in Cant. Cantic._, Lommatzsch xiv.
325): "De scripturis his, quae appellantur apocryphae, pro eo quod multa
in iis corrupta et contra fidem veram inveniuntur a majoribus tradita
non placuit iis dari locum nec admitti ad auctoritatem."

In addition to the above three meanings strange uses of the term appear
in the western church. Thus the Gelasian Decree includes the works of
Eusebius, Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria, under this designation.
Augustine (_De Civ. Dei_, xv. 23) explains it as meaning obscurity of
origin, while Jerome (_Protogus Galeatus_) declares that all books
outside the Hebrew canon belong to this class of apocrypha. Jerome's
practice, however, did not square with his theory. The western church
did not accept Jerome's definition of apocrypha, but retained the word
in its original meaning, though great confusion prevailed. Thus the
degree of estimation in which the apocryphal books have been held in the
church has varied much according to place and time. As they stood in the
Septuagint or Greek canon, along with the other books, and with no
marks of distinction, they were practically employed by the Greek
Fathers in the same way as the other books; hence Origen, Clement and
others often cite them as "scripture," "divine scripture," "inspired,"
and the like. On the other hand, teachers connected with Palestine, and
familiar with the Hebrew canon, rigidly exclude all but the books
contained there. This view is reflected, for example, in the canon of
Melito of Sardis, and in the prefaces and letters of Jerome. Augustine,
however (_De Doct. Christ_. ii. 8), attaches himself to the other side.
Two well-defined views in this way prevailed, to which was added a
third, according to which the books, though not to be put in the same
rank as the canonical scriptures of the Hebrew collection, yet were of
value for moral uses and to be read in congregations,--and hence they
were called "ecclesiastical"--a designation first found in Rufinus
(_ob_. 410). Notwithstanding the decisions of some councils held in
Africa, which were in favour of the view of Augustine, these diverse
opinions regarding the apocryphal books continued to prevail in the
church down through the ages till the great dogmatic era of the
Reformation. At that epoch the same three opinions were taken up and
congealed into dogmas, which may be considered characteristic of the
churches adopting them. In 1546 the council of Trent adopted the canon
of Augustine, declaring "He is also to be anathema who does not receive
these entire books, with all their parts, as they have been accustomed
to be read in the Catholic Church, and are found in the ancient editions
of the Latin Vulgate, as sacred and canonical." The whole of the books
in question, with the exception of 1st and 2nd Esdras, and the Prayer of
Manasses, were declared canonical at Trent. On the other hand, the
Protestants universally adhered to the opinion that only the books in
the Hebrew collection are canonical. Already Wycliffe had declared that
"whatever book is in the Old Testament besides these twenty-five
(Hebrew) shall be set among the apocrypha, that is, without authority or
belief." Yet among the churches of the Reformation a milder and a
severer view prevailed regarding the apocrypha. Both in the German and
English translations (Luther's, 1537; Coverdale's, 1535, &c.) these
books are separated from the others and set by themselves; but while in
some confessions, e.g. the Westminster, a decided judgment is passed on
them, that they are not "to be any otherwise approved or made use of
than other human writings," a milder verdict is expressed regarding them
in many other quarters, e.g. in the "argument" prefixed to them in the
Geneva Bible; in the Sixth Article of the Church of England, where it is
said that "the other books the church doth read for example of life and
instruction of manners," though not to establish doctrine; and
elsewhere.

OLD TESTAMENT APOCRYPHAL BOOKS

We shall now proceed to enumerate the apocryphal books: first the
Apocrypha Proper, and next the rest of the Old and New Testament
apocryphal literature.

1. _The Apocrypha Proper_, or the apocrypha of the Old Testament as used
by English-speaking Protestants, consists of the following books: 1
Esdras, 2 Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Additions to Esther, Wisdom of Solomon,
Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Epistle of Jeremy, Additions to Daniel (Song of
the Three Holy Children, History of Susannah, and Bel and the Dragon),
Prayer of Manasses, 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees. Thus the Apocrypha Proper
constitutes the surplusage of the Vulgate or Bible of the Roman Church
over the Hebrew Old Testament. Since this surplusage is in turn derived
from the Septuagint, from which the old Latin version was translated, it
thus follows that the difference between the Protestant and the Roman
Catholic Old Testament is, roughly speaking, traceable to the difference
between the Palestinian and the Alexandrian canons of the Old Testament.
But this is only true with certain reservations; for the Latin Vulgate
was revised by Jerome according to the Hebrew, and, where Hebrew
originals were wanting, according to the Septuagint. Furthermore, the
Vulgate rejects 3 and 4 Maccabees and Psalm cli., which generally appear
in the Septuagint, while the Septuagint and Luther's Bible reject 4
Ezra, which is found in the Vulgate and the Apocrypha Proper. Luther's
Bible, moreover, rejects also 3 Ezra. It should further be observed that
the Vulgate adds the Prayer of Manasses and 3 and 4 Ezra after the New
Testament as apocryphal.

It is hardly possible to form any classification which is not open to
some objection. In any case the classification must be to some extent
provisional, since scholars are still divided as to the original
language, date and place of composition of some of the books which must
come under our classification.[4] We may, however, discriminate (i.) the
Palestinian and (ii.) the Hellenistic literature of the Old Testament,
though even this distinction is open to serious objections. The former
literature was generally written in Hebrew or Aramaic, and seldom in
Greek; the latter naturally in Greek. Next, within these literatures we
shall distinguish three or four classes according to the nature of the
subject with which they deal. Thus the books of which we have to treat
will be classed as: (a) Historical, (b) Legendary (Haggadic), (c)
Apocalyptic, (d) Didactic or Sapiential.

The Apocrypha Proper then would be classified as follows:--

  i. Palestinian Jewish Literature:--
     (a) _Historical_.
        1 (i.e. 3) Ezra.
        1 Maccabees.

     (b) _Legendary_.
         Book of Baruch (see BARUCH).
         Judith.

     (c) _Apocalyptic_.
         2 (i.e. 4) Ezra (see also under separate article on APOCALYPTIC
           LITERATURE).

     (d) _Didactic_.
         Sirach (see ECCLESIASTICUS).
         Tobit.

  ii. Hellenistic Jewish Literature:--
     _Historical and Legendary_.
          Additions to Daniel (q.v.).
              "     "  Esther (q.v.).
          Epistle of Jeremy (q.v.).
          2 Maccabees (q.v.).
          Prayer of Manasses (see MANASSES).

     _Didactic_.
          Book of Wisdom (see WISDOM, BOOK OF.)

Since all these books are dealt with in separate articles, they call for
no further notice here.

LITERATURE.--Texts:--Holmes and Parsons, _Vet. Test. Graecum cum var.
lectionibus_ (Oxford, 1798-1827); Swete, _Old Testament in Greek_,
i.-iii. (Cambridge, 1887-1894); Fritzsche, _Libri Apocryphi V.T. Graece_
(1871). Commentaries:--O.F. Fritzsche and Grimm, _Kurzgef. exeget.
Handbuch zu den Apok. des A.T_. (Leipzig, 1851-1860); E.C. Bissell,
_Apocrypha of the Old Testament_ (Edinburgh, 1880); Zockler, _Apok. des
A.T._ (Munchen, 1891); Wace, _The Apocrypha_ ("Speaker's Commentary")
(1888). Introduction and General Literature:--E. Schürer³, _Geschichte
des jud. Volkes_, vol. iii. 135 sqq., and his article on "Apokryphen" in
Herzog's _Realencykl_. i. 622-653; Porter in Hastings' _Bible Dic_. i.
111-123.

  2 (a). _Other Old Testament Apocryphal Literature_:--

     (a) _Historical_.
         History of Johannes Hyrcanus.

     (b) _Legendary_.
         Book of Jubilees.
         Paralipomena Jeremiae, or the Rest of the Words of Baruch.
         Martyrdom of Isaiah.
         Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum.
         Books of Adam.
         Jannes and Jambres.
         Joseph and Asenath.

     (c) _Apocalyptic_.
        (See separate article.)

     (d) _Didactic or Sapiential_.
         Pirke Aboth.

(a) _Historical._--_The History of Johannes Hyrcanus_ is mentioned in 1
Macc. xvi. 23-24, but no trace has been discovered of its existence
elsewhere. It must have early passed out of circulation, as it was
unknown to Josephus.

(b) _Legendary._--The _Book of Jubilees_ was written in Hebrew by a
Pharisee between the year of the accession of Hyrcanus to the
high-priesthood in 135 and his breach with the Pharisees some years
before his death in 105 B.C. _Jubilees_ was translated into Greek and
from Greek into Ethiopic and Latin. It is preserved in its entirety
only in Ethiopic. _Jubilees_ is the most advanced pre-Christian
representative of the midrashic tendency, which was already at work in
the Old Testament 1 and 2 Chronicles. As the chronicler rewrote the
history of Israel and Judah from the basis of the Priests' Code, so our
author re-edited from the Pharisaic standpoint of his time the book of
Genesis and the early chapters of Exodus. His work constitutes an
enlarged targum on these books, and its object is to prove the
everlasting validity of the law, which, though revealed in time, was
superior to time. Writing in the palmiest days of the Maccabean
dominion, he looked for the immediate advent of the Messianic kingdom.
This kingdom was to be ruled over by a Messiah sprung not from Judah but
from Levi, that is, from the reigning Maccabean family. This kingdom was
to be gradually realized on earth, the transformation of physical nature
going hand in hand with the ethical transformation of man. (For a fuller
account see JUBILEES, BOOK OF.)

_Paralipomena Jeremiae_, or the _Rest of the Words of Baruch._--This
book has been preserved in Greek, Ethiopic, Armenian and Slavonic. The
Greek was first printed at Venice in 1609, and next by Ceriani in 1868
under the title _Paralipomena Jeremiae_. It bears the same name in the
Armenian, but in Ethiopic it is known by the second title. (See under
BARUCH.)

_Martyrdom of Isaiah._--This Jewish work has been in part preserved in
the _Ascension of Isaiah_. To it belong i. 1, 2^a, 6^b-13^a; ii. 1-8,
10-iii. 12; v. 1^c-14 of that book. It is of Jewish origin, and recounts
the martyrdom of Isaiah at the hands of Manasseh. (See ISAIAH, ASCENSION
OF.)

_Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum._--Though the Latin
version of this book was thrice printed in the 16th century (in 1527,
1550 and 1599), it was practically unknown to modern scholars till it
was recognized by Conybeare and discussed by Cohn in the _Jewish
Quarterly Review_, 1898, pp. 279-332. It is an Haggadic revision of the
Biblical history from Adam to the death of Saul. Its chronology agrees
frequently with the LXX. against that of the Massoretic text, though
conversely in a few cases. The Latin is undoubtedly translated from the
Greek. Greek words are frequently transliterated. While the LXX. is
occasionally followed in its translation of Biblical passages, in others
the Massoretic is followed against the LXX., and in one or two passages
the text presupposes a text different from both. On many grounds Cohn
infers a Hebrew original. The eschatology is similar to that taught in
the similitudes of the Book of Enoch. In fact, Eth. En. li. 1 is
reproduced in this connexion. Prayers of the departed are said to be
valueless. The book was written after A.D. 70; for, as Cohn has shown,
the exact date of the fall of Herod's temple is predicted.

_Life of Adam and Eve._--Writings dealing with this subject are extant
in Greek, Latin, Slavonic, Syriac, Armenian and Arabic. They go back
undoubtedly to a Jewish basis, but in some of the forms in which they
appear at present they are christianized throughout. The oldest and for
the most part Jewish portion of this literature is preserved to us in
Greek, Armenian, Latin and Slavonic, (i.) The Greek [Greek: Diêgêsis
peri Adam kai Euas] (published under the misleading title [Greek:
Apokalypsis Mouseos] in Tischendorf's _Apocalypses Apocryphae_, 1866)
deals with the Fall and the death of Adam and Eve. Ceriani edited this
text from a Milan MS. (_Monumenta Sacra et Profana_, v. i). This work is
found also in Armenian, and has been published by the Mechitharist
community in Venice in their _Collection of Uncanonical Writings of the
Old Testament_, and translated by Conybeare (_Jewish Quarterly Review_,
vii. 216 sqq., 1895), and by Issaverdens in 1901. (ii.) The _Vita Adae
et Evae_ is closely related and in part identical with (i.). It was
printed by W. Meyer in _Abh. d. Münch. Akad._, Philos.-philol. Cl. xiv.,
1878. (iii.) The Slavonic Adam book was published by Jajic along with a
Latin translation (_Denkschr. d. Wien. Akad. d. Wiss._ xlii., 1893).
This version agrees for the most part with (i.). It has, moreover, a
section, §§ 28-39, which though not found in (i.) is found in (ii.).
Before we discuss these three documents we shall mention other members
of this literature, which, though derivable ultimately from Jewish
sources, are Christian in their present form, (iv.) _The Book of Adam
and Eve_, also called the _Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan_,
translated from the Ethiopic (1882) by Malan. This was first translated
by Dillmann (_Das christl. Adambuch des Morgenlandes_, 1853), and the
Ethiopic book first edited by Trump (_Abh. d. Münch. Akad._ xv.,
1870-1881). (v.) A Syriac work entitled _Die Schalzhöhle_ translated by
Bezold from three Syriac MSS. in 1883 and subsequently edited in Syriac
in 1888. This work has close affinities to (iv.), but is said by
Dillmann to be more original, (vi.) Armenian books on the _Death of
Adam_ (_Uncanonical Writings of O.T._ pp. 84 sqq., 1901, translated from
the Armenian), _Creation and Transgression of Adam_ (_op. cit._ 39
sqq.), _Expulsion of Adam from Paradise_ (_op. cit._ 47 sqq.),
_Penitence of Adam and Eve_ (_op. cit._ 71 sqq.) are mainly later
writings from Christian hands.

Returning to the question of the Jewish origin of i., ii., iii., we have
already observed that these spring from a common original. As to the
language of this original, scholars are divided. The evidence, however,
seems to be strongly in favour of Hebrew. How otherwise are we to
explain such Hebraisms (or Syriacisms) as [Greek: euo rheei to helaion
ex autou] (§ 9), [Greek: ou eipen ... mê phagein ap autou] (§ 21). For
others see §§ 23, 33. Moreover, as Fuchs has pointed out, in the words
[Greek: hesau en mataiois] addressed to Eve (§ 25) there is a corruption
of [Hebrew: havalim] into [Hebrew: avalim]. Thus the words were: "Thou
shalt have pangs." In fact, Hebraisms abound throughout this book. (See
Fuchs, _Apok. u. Pseud, d. A.T._ ii. 511; _Jewish Encyc._ i. 179 sq.)

_Jannes and Jambres._--These two men are referred to in 2 Tim. iii. 8 as
the Egyptian magicians who withstood Moses. The book which treats of
them is mentioned by Origen (_ad Matt._ xxiii. 37 and xxvii. 9 [_Jannes
et Mambres Liber_]), and in the Gelasian Decree as the Paenitentia
Jamnis et Mambre. The names in Greek are generally [Greek: Iannês kai
Iambrês] (= [Hebrew: yanim veyambarim]) as in the Targ.-Jon. on Exod. i.
15; vii. ii. In the Talmud they appear as [Hebrew: iohani umamra]. Since
the western text of 2 Tim. iii. 8 has [Greek: Mambrês], Westcott and
Hort infer that this form was derived from a Palestinian source. These
names were known not only to Jewish but also to heathen writers, such as
Pliny and Apuleius. The book, therefore, may go back to pre-Christian
times. (See Schürer³ iii. 292-294; _Ency. Biblica_, ii. 2327-2329.)

_Joseph and Asenath._--The statement in Gen. xli. 45, 50 that Joseph
married the daughter of a heathen priest naturally gave offence to later
Judaism, and gave rise to the fiction that Asenath was really the
daughter of Shechem and Dinah, and only the foster-daughter of
Potipherah (_Targ.-Jon._ on Gen. xli. 45; Tractat. _Sopherim_, xxi. 9;
_Jalkut Shimoni_, c. 134. See Oppenheim, _Fabula Josephi et Asenethae_,
1886, pp. 2-4). Origen also was acquainted with some form of the legend
(_Selecta in Genesin_, ad Gen. xli. 45, ed. Lommatzsch, viii. 89-90).
The Christian legend, which is no doubt in the main based on the Jewish,
is found in Greek, Syriac, Armenian, Slavonic and Medieval Latin. Since
it is not earlier than the 3rd or 4th century, it will be sufficient
here to refer to Smith's _Dict. of Christ. Biog._ i. 176-177; Hastings'
_Bible Dict._ i. 162-163; Schürer, iii. 289-291.

(d) _Didactic or Sapiential._--The _Pirke Aboth_, a collection of
sayings of the Jewish Fathers, are preserved in the 9th Tractate of the
Fourth Order of the Mishnah. They are attributed to some sixty Jewish
teachers, belonging for the most part to the years A.D. 70-170, though a
few of them are of a much earlier date. The book holds the same place in
rabbinical literature as the Book of Proverbs in the Bible. The sayings
are often admirable. Thus in iv. 1-4, "Who is wise? He that learns from
every man.... Who is mighty? He that subdues his nature.... Who is rich?
He that is contented with his lot.... Who is honoured? He that honours
mankind." (See further PIRKE ABOTH.)

  2 (b). _New Testament Apocryphal Literature_:--

     (a). _Gospels_:--
          Uncanonical sayings of the Lord in Christian and Jewish
             writings.
          Gospel according to the Egyptians.
             "       "      "     Hebrews.
          Protevangel of James.

          Gospel of  Nicodemus.
            "    "   Peter.
            "    "   Thomas.
            "    "   the Twelve.
          Gnostic gospels of Andrew, Apelles, Barnabas, Bartholomew,
             Basilides, Cerinthus and some seventeen others.

     (b) _Acts and Teachings of the Apostles_:--
         Acts of Andrew and later forms of these Acts.
          "    John.
          "    Paul.
          "    Peter.
         Preaching of Peter.
         Acts of Thomas.
         Teaching of the Twelve Apostles.
         Apostolic constitutions.

     (c) _Epistles_:--
         The Abgar Epistles.
         Epistle of Barnabas.
            "    "  Clement.
         "Clement's" 2nd Epistle of the Corinthians.
              "      Epistles on Virginity.
              "         "     to James.
         Epistles of Ignatius.
         Epistle of Polycarp.
         Pauline Epp. to the Laodiceans and Alexandrians.
         3 Pauline Ep. to the Corinthians.

     (d) _Apocalypses_: see under APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE.

(a) GOSPELS.--_Uncanonical Sayings of the Lord in Christian and Jewish
Sources._--Under the head of canonical sayings not found in the Gospels
only one is found, i.e. that in Acts xx. 35. Of the rest the uncanonical
sayings have been collected by Preuschen (_Reste der ausserkanonischen
Evangelien_, 1901, pp. 44-47). A different collection will be found in
Hennecke, _NTliche Apok._ 9-11. The same subject is dealt with in the
elaborate volumes of Resch (_Aussercanonische Paralleltexte zu den
Evangelien_, vols. i.-iii., 1893-1895).

To this section belongs also the _Fayum Gospel Fragment_ and the _Logia_
published by Grenfell and Hunt.[5] The former contains two sayings of
Christ and one of Peter, such as we find in the canonical gospels, Matt.
xxvi. 31-34, Mark xiv. 27-30. The papyrus, which is of the 3rd century,
was discovered by Bickell among the Rainer collection, who characterized
it (_Z. f. kath. Theol._, 1885, pp. 498-504) as a fragment of one of the
primitive gospels mentioned in Luke i. 1. On the other hand, it has been
contended that it is merely a fragment of an early patristic homily.
(See Zahn, _Gesch. Kanons_, ii. 780-790; Harnack, _Texte und
Untersuchungen_, v. 4; Preuschen, _op. cit._ p. 19.) The _Logia_ (q.v.)
is the name given to the sayings contained in a papyrus leaf, by its
discoverers Grenfell and Hunt. They think the papyrus was probably
written about A.D. 200. According to Harnack, it is an extract from the
_Gospel of the Egyptians_. All the passages referring to Jesus in the
Talmud are given by Laible, _Jesus Christus im Talmud_, with an
appendix, "Die talmudischen Texte," by G. Dalman (2nd ed. 1901). The
first edition of this work was translated into English by A.W. Streane
(_Jesus Christ in the Talmud_, 1893). In Hennecke's _NTliche Apok.
Handbuch_ (pp. 47-71) there is a valuable study of this question by A.
Meyer, entitled _Jesus, Jesu Jünger und das Evangelium im Talmud und
verwandten jüdischen Schriflen_, to which also a good bibliography of
the subject is prefixed.

_Gospel according to the Egyptians._--This gospel is first mentioned by
Clem. Alex. (_Strom._ iii. 6. 45; 9. 63, 66; 13. 92), subsequently by
Origen (_Hom. in Luc._ i.) and Epiphanius (_Haer._ lxii. 2), and a
fragment is preserved in the so-called 2 Clem. Rom. xii. 2. It
circulated among various heretical circles; amongst the Encratites
(Clem. _Strom._ iii. 9), the Naas-senes (Hippolyt. _Philos._ v. 7), and
the Sabellians (Epiph. _Haer._ lxii. 2). Only three or four fragments
survive; see Lipsius (Smith and Wace, _Dict. of Christ. Biog._ ii. 712,
713); Zahn, _Gesch. Kanons_, ii. 628-642; Preuschen, _Reste d.
ausserkanonischen Evangelien_, 1901, p. 2, which show that it was a
product of pantheistic Gnosticism. With this pantheistic Gnosticism is
associated a severe asceticism. The distinctions of sex are one day to
come to an end; the prohibition of marriage follows naturally on this
view. Hence Christ is represented as coming to destroy the work of the
female (Clem. Alex. _Strom._ iii. 9. 63). Lipsius and Zahn assign it to
the middle of the 2nd century. It may be earlier.

_Protevangel of James._--This title was first given in the 16th century
to a writing which is referred to as _The Book of James_ ([Greek: hê
biblos Iakobou]) by Origen (tom. xi. _in Matt._). Its author designates
it as [Greek: Istoria]. For various other designations see Tischendorf,
_Evang. Apocr.²_ 1 seq. The narrative extends from the Conception of the
Virgin to the Death of Zacharias. Lipsius shows that in the present form
of the book there is side by side a strange "admixture of intimate
knowledge and gross ignorance of Jewish thought and custom," and that
accordingly we must "distinguish between an original Jewish Christian
writing and a Gnostic recast of it." The former was known to Justin
(_Dial._ 78, 101) and Clem. Alex. (_Strom._ vii. 16), and belongs at
latest to the earliest years of the 2nd century. The Gnostic recast
Lipsius dates about the middle of the 3rd century. From these two works
arose independently the _Protevangel_ in its present form and the Latin
pseudo-Matthaeus (_Evangelium pseudo-Matthaei_). The _Evangelium de
Nativitate Mariae_ is a redaction of the latter. (See Lipsius in Smith's
_Dict. of Christ. Biog._ ii. 701-703.) But if we except the Zachariah
and John group of legends, it is not necessary to assume the Gnostic
recast of this work in the 3rd century as is done by Lipsius. The author
had at his disposal two distinct groups of legends about Mary. One of
these groups is certainly of non-Jewish origin, as it conceives Mary as
living in the temple somewhat after the manner of a vestal virgin or a
priestess of Isis. The other group is more in accord with the orthodox
gospels. The book appears to have been written in Egypt, and in the
early years of the 2nd century. For, since Origen states that many
appealed to it in support of the view that the brothers of Jesus were
sons of Joseph by a former marriage, the book must have been current
about A.D. 200. From Origen we may ascend to Clem. Alex. who (_Strom._
vi. 93) shows acquaintance with one of the chief doctrines of the
book--the perpetual virginity of Mary. Finally, as Justin's statements
as to the birth of Jesus in a cave and Mary's descent from David show in
all probability his acquaintance with the book, it may with good grounds
be assigned to the first decade of the 2nd century. (So Zahn, _Gesch.
Kanons_, i. 485, 499, 502, 504, 539; ii. 774-780.) For the Greek text
see Tischendorf, _Evang. Apocr.²_ 1-50; B.P. Grenfell, _An Alexandrian
erotic Fragment and other Papyri_, 1896, pp. 13-17: for the Syriac,
Wright, _Contributions to Apocryphal Literature of the N.T._, 1865, pp.
3-7; A.S. Lewis, _Studia Sinaitica_, xi. pp. 1-22. See literature
generally in Hennecke, _NT liche Apok. Handbuch_, 106 seq.

_Gospel of Nicodemus._--This title is first met with in the 13th
century. It is used to designate an apocryphal writing entitled in the
older MSS. [Greek: hypomnêmata tou Kuriou hêmon Iêsou Christou
praxchenta epi Pontiou Pilatou]; also "Gesta Salvatoris Domini ...
inventa Theodosio magno imperatore in Ierusalem in praetorio Pontii
Pilati in codicibus publicis." See Tischendorf, _Evang. Apocr.²_ pp.
333-335. This work gives an account of the Passion (i.-xi.), the
Resurrection (xii.-xvi.), and the _Descensus ad Inferos_ (xvii.-xxvii.).
Chapters i.-xvi. are extant, in the Greek, Coptic, and two Armenian
versions. The two Latin versions and a Byzantine recension of the Greek
contain i.-xxvii. (see Tischendorf, _Evangelia Apocrypha²_, pp.
210-458). All known texts go back to A.D. 425, if one may trust the
reference to Theodosius. But this was only a revision, for as early as
376 Epiphanius (_Haer._ i. 1.) presupposes the existence of a like text.
In 325 Eusebius (_H.E._ ii. 2) was acquainted only with the heathen
_Acts of Pilate_, and knew nothing of a Christian work. Tischendorf and
Hofmann, however, find evidence of its existence in Justin's reference
to the [Greek: Hakta Pilatou] (_Apol._ i. 35, 48), and in Tertullian's
mention of the _Acta Pilati_ (_Apol._ 21), and on this evidence
attribute our texts to the first half of the 2nd century. But these
references have been denied by Scholten, Lipsius, and Lightfoot.
Recently Schubert has sought to derive the elements which are found in
the Petrine Gospel, but not in the canonical gospels, from the original
_Acta Pilati_, while Zahn exactly reverses the relation of these two
works. Rendel Harris (1899) advocated the view that the Gospel of
Nicodemus, as we possess it, is merely a prose version of the Gospel of
Nicodemus written originally in Homeric centones as early as the 2nd
century. Lipsius and Dobschütz relegate the book to the 4th century. The
question is not settled yet (see Lipsius in Smith's _Dict. of Christ.
Biography_, ii. 708-709, and Dobschütz in Hastings' _Bible Dictionary_,
iii. 544-547).

_Gospel according to the Hebrews._--This gospel was cited by Ignatius
(_Ad Smyrnaeos_, iii.) according to Jerome (_Viris illus._ 16, and _in
Jes._ lib. xviii.), but this is declared to be untrustworthy by Zahn,
op. cit. i. 921; ii. 701, 702. It was written in Aramaic in Hebrew
letters, according to Jerome (_Adv. Pelag._ iii. 2), and translated by
him into Greek and Latin. Both these translations are lost. A collection
of the Greek and Latin fragments that have survived, mainly in Origen
and Jerome, will be found in Hilgenfeld's _NT extra Canonem receptum_,
Nicholson's _Gospel according to the Hebrews_ (1879), Westcott's
_Introd. to the Gospels_, and Zahn's _Gesch. des NTlichen Kanons_, ii.
642-723; Preuschen, _op. cit_. 3-8. This gospel was regarded by many in
the first centuries as the Hebrew original of the canonical Matthew
(Jerome, _in Matt._ xii. 13; _Adv. Pelag._ iii. 1). With the canonical
gospel it agrees in some of its sayings; in others it is independent. It
circulated among the Nazarenes in Syria, and was composed, according to
Zahn (_op. cit._ ii. 722), between the years 135 and 150. Jerome
identifies it with the _Gospel of the Twelve_ (_Adv. Pelag._ iii. 2),
and states that it was used by the Ebionites (_Comm. in Matt._ xii. 13).
Zahn (_op. cit._ ii. 662, 724) contests both these statements. The
former he traces to a mistaken interpretation of Origen (_Hom. I. in
Luc._). Lipsius, on the other hand, accepts the statements of Jerome
(Smith and Wace, _Dict. of Christian Biography_, ii. 709-712), and is of
opinion that this gospel, in the form in which it was known to
Epiphanius, Jerome and Origen, was "a recast of an older original,"
which, written originally in Aramaic, was nearly related to the Logia
used by St Matthew and the Ebionitic writing used by St Luke, "which
itself was only a later redaction of the Logia."

According to the most recent investigations we may conclude that the
Gospel according to the Hebrews was current among the Nazarenes and
Ebionites as early as 100-125, since Ignatius was familiar with the
phrase "I am no bodiless demon"--a phrase which, according to Jerome
(_Comm. in Is._ xviii.), belonged to this Gospel.

The name "Gospel according to the Hebrews" cannot have been original;
for if it had been so named because of its general use among the
Hebrews, yet the Hebrews themselves would not have used this
designation. It may have been known simply as "the Gospel." The language
was Western Aramaic, the mother tongue of Jesus and his apostles. Two
forms of Western Aramaic survive: the Jerusalem form of the dialect, in
the Aramaic portions of Daniel and Ezra; and the Galilean, in isolated
expressions in the Talmud (3rd century), and in a fragmentary 5th
century translation of the Bible. The quotations from the Old Testament
are made from the Massoretic text.

This gospel must have been translated at an early date into Greek, as
Clement and Origen cite it as generally accessible, and Eusebius
recounts that many reckoned it among the received books The gospel is
synoptic in character and is closely related to Matthew, though in the
Resurrection accounts it has affinities with Luke. Like Mark it seems to
have had no history of the birth of Christ, and to have begun with the
baptism. (For the literature see Hennecke, _NTliche Apok. Handbuch_,
21-23.)

_Gospel of Peter._--Before 1892 we had some knowlege of this gospel.
Thus Serapion, bishop of Antioch (A.D. 190-203) found it in use in the
church of Rhossus in Cilicia, and condemned it as Docetic (Eusebius,
_H.E._ vi. 12). Again, Origen (_In Matt._ tom. xvii. 10) says that it
represented the brethren of Christ as his half-brothers In 1885 a long
fragment was discovered at Akhmim, and published by Bouriant in 1892,
and subsequently by Lods, Robinson, Harnack, Zahn, Schubert, Swete.

_Gospel of Thomas._--This gospel professes to give an account of our
Lord's boyhood. It appears in two recensions. The more complete
recension bears the title [Greek: Thoma Isrêalitou Philosophou hrêta eis
ta paidika Kuriou], and treats of the period from the 7th to the 12th
year (Tischendorf, _Evangelia Apocrypha²_, 1876, 140-157). The more
fragmentary recension gives the history of the childhood from the 5th to
the 8th year, and is entitled [Greek: Sungramma tou hagiou apostolou
Thoma peri tês paidikês anastrophês tou Kuriou] (Tischendorf, _op. cit._
pp. 158-163). Two Latin translations have been published in this work by
the same scholar--one on pp. 164-180, the other under the wrong title,
_Pseudo-Matthaei Evangelium_, on pp. 93-112. A Syriac version, with an
English translation, was published by Wright in 1875. This gospel was
originally still more Docetic than it now is, according to Lipsius. Its
present form is due to an orthodox revision which discarded, so far as
possible, all Gnostic traces. Lipsius (Smith's _Dict. of Christ. Biog._
ii. 703) assigns it to the latter half of the 2nd century, but Zahn
(_Gesch. Kan._ ii. 771), on good grounds, to the earlier half. The
latter scholar shows that probably it was used by Justin (_Dial._ 88).
At all events it circulated among the Marcosians (Irenaeus, _Haer._ i.
20) and the Naasenes (Hippolytus, _Refut._ v. 7), and subsequently among
the Manichaeans, and is frequently quoted from Origen downwards (_Hom.
I. in Luc._). If the stichometry of Nicephorus is right, the existing
form of the book is merely fragmentary compared with its original
compass. For literature see Hennecke, _NTliche Apokryphen Handbuch_, 132
seq.

_Gospel of the Twelve._--This gospel, which Origen knew (_Hom. I. in
Luc._), is not to be identified with the _Gospel according to the
Hebrews_ (see above), with Lipsius and others, who have sought to
reconstruct the original gospel from the surviving fragments of these
two distinct works. The only surviving fragments of the _Gospel of the
Twelve_ have been preserved by Epiphanius (_Haer._ xxx. 13-16, 22: see
Preuschen, _op. cit._ 9-11). It began with an account of the baptism. It
was used by the Ebionites, and was written, according to Zahn (op. cit.
ii. 742), about A.D. 170.

OTHER GOSPELS MAINLY GNOSTIC AND ALMOST ALL LOST.--_Gospel of
Andrew._--This is condemned in the Gelasian Decree, and is probably the
gospel mentioned by Innocent (1 Ep. iii. 7) and Augustine (_Contra
advers. Leg. et Proph._ i. 20).

_Gospel of Apelles._--Mentioned by Jerome in his _Prooem. ad Matt._

_Gospel of Barnabas._--Condemned in the Gelasian Decree (see under
BARNABAS _ad fin_.).

_Gospel of Bartholomew._--Mentioned by Jerome in his _Prooem. ad Matt._
and condemned in the Gelasian Decree.

_Gospel of Basilides._--Mentioned by Origen (_Tract. 26 in Matt._
xxxiii. 34, and in his _Prooem. in Luc._); by Jerome in his _Prooem. in
Matt._ (See Harnack i. 161; ii. 536-537; Zahn, _Gesch. Kanons_, i.
763-774.)

_Gospel of Cerinthus._--Mentioned by Epiphanius (_Haer._ li. 7).

_Gospel of the Ebionites._--A fragmentary edition of the canonical
Matthew according to Epiphanius (_Haer._ xxx. 13), used by the Ebionites
and called by them the Hebrew Gospel.

_Gospel of Eve._--A quotation from this gospel is given by Epiphanius
(_Haer._ xxvi. 2, 3). It is possible that this is the Gospel of
Perfection ([Greek: Euangelion teleioseos]) which he touches upon in
xxvi. 2. The quotation shows that this gospel was the expression of
complete pantheism.

_Gospel of James the Less._--Condemned in the Gelasian Decree.

_Wisdom of Jesus Christ._--This third work contained in the Coptic MS.
referred to under _Gospel of Mary_ gives cosmological disclosures and is
presumably of Valentinian origin.

_Apocryph of John._--This book, which is found in the Coptic MS.
referred to under _Gospel of Mary_ and contains cosmological disclosures
of Christ, is said to have formed the source of Irenaeus' account of the
Gnostics of Barbelus (i. 29-31). Thus this work would have been written
before 170.

_Gospel of Judas Iscariot._--References to this gospel as in use among
the Cainites are made by Irenaeus (i. 31. 1); Epiphanius (xxxviii. 1.
3).

_Gospel, The Living (Evangelium Vivum)._--This was a gospel of the
Manichaeans. See Epiphanius, _Haer_. lxvi. 2; Photius, _Contra Manich_.
i.

_Gospel of Marcion._--On this important gospel see Zahn, _Gesch.
Kanons_, i. 585-718.

_Descent of Mary_ ([Greek: Tenna Marias]).--This book was an anti-Jewish
legend representing Zacharias as having been put to death by the Jews
because he had seen the God of the Jews in the form of an ass in the
temple (Epiphanius, _Haer_. xxvi. 12).

_Questions of Mary_ (_Great and Little_).--Epiphanius (_Haer_. xxvi. 8)
gives some excerpts from this revolting work.

_Gospel of Mary._--This gospel is found in a Coptic MS. of the 5th
century. According to Schmidt's short account, _Sitzungsberichte d.
preuss. Akad. d. Wiss. zu. Berlin_ (1896), pp. 839 sqq., this gospel
gives disclosures on the nature of matter ([Greek: ulae]) and the
progress of the Gnostic soul through the seven planets.

_Gospel of Matthias._--Though this gospel is attested by Origen (_Horm.
in Luc._ i.), Eusebius, _H.E._ iii. 25. 6, and the List of Sixty Books,
not a shred of it has been preserved, unless with Zahn ii. 751 sqq. we
are to identify it with the _Traditions of Matthias_, from which Clement
has drawn some quotations.

_Gospel of Perfection_ (_Evangelium perfectionis_).--Used by the
followers of Basilides and other Gnostics. See Epiphanius, _Haer._ xxvi.
2.

_Gospel of Philip._--This gospel described the progress of a soul
through the next world. It is of a strongly Encratite character and
dates from the 2nd century. A fragment is preserved in Epiphanius,
_Haer_. xxvi. 13. In Preuschen, _Reste_, p. 13, the quotation breaks off
too soon. See Zahn ii. 761-768.

_Gospel of Thaddaeus._--Condemned by the Gelasian Decree.

_Gospel of Thomas._--Of this gospel only one fragment has been preserved
in Hippolytus, _Philos_. v. 7, pp. 140 seq. See Zahn, _op. cit._ i. 746
seq.; ii. 768-773; Harnack ii. 593-595.

_Gospel of Truth._--This gospel is mentioned by Irenaeus i. 11. 9, and
was used by the Valentinians. See Zahn i. 748 sqq.

(b) ACTS AND TEACHINGS OF THE APOSTLES.--_Acts of Andrew._--These Acts,
which are of a strongly Encratite character, have come down to us in a
fragmentary condition. They belong to the earliest ages, for they are
mentioned by Eusebius, _H.E._ iii. 25; Epiphanius, _Haer._ xlvii. 1;
lxi. 1; lxiii. 2; Philaster, _Haer._ lxviii., as current among the
Manichaeans and heretics. They are attributed to Leucius, a Docetic
writer, by Augustine (_c. Felic. Manich._ ii. 6) and Euodius (_De Fide
c. Manich._ 38). Euodius in the passage just referred to preserves two
small fragments of the original Acts. On internal grounds the section
recounting Andrew's imprisonment (Bonnet, _Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha_,
ii. 38-45) is also probably a constituent of the original work. As
regards the martyrdom, owing to the confusion introduced by the
multitudinous Catholic revisions of this section of the Acts, it is
practically impossible to restore its original form. For a complete
discussion of the various documents see Lipsius, _Apokryphen
Apostelgeschichte_, i. 543-622; also James in Hastings' _Bible Dict._ i.
92-93; Hennecke, _NT. Apokryphen_, _in loc._ The best texts are given in
Bonnet's _Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha_, 1898, II. i. 1-127. These contain
also the _Acts of Andrew and Matthew_ (or Matthias) in which Matthew (or
Matthias) is represented as a captive in the country of the
anthropophagi. Christ takes Andrew and his disciples with Him, and
effects the rescue of Matthew. The legend is found also in Ethiopic,
Syriac and Anglo-Saxon. Also the _Acts of Peter and Andrew_, which among
other incidents recount the miracle of a camel passing through the eye
of a needle. This work is preserved partly in Greek, but in its entirety
in Slavonic.

_Acts of John._--Clement of Alexandria in his _Hypotyposes_ on 1 John i.
1 seems to refer to chapters xciii. (or lxxxix.) of these Acts. Eusebius
(_H.E._ iii. 25. 6), Epiphanius (_Haer._ xlvii. 1) and other ancient
writers assign them to the authorship of Leucius Charinus. It is
generally admitted that they were written in the 2nd century. The text
has been edited most completely by Bonnet, _Acta Apostol. Apocr._, 1898,
151-216. The contents might be summarized with Hennecke as
follows:--Arrival and first sojourn of the apostle in Ephesus
(xviii.-lv.); return to Ephesus and second sojourn (history of Drusiana,
lviii.-lxxxvi.); account of the crucifixion of Jesus and His apparent
death (lxxxvii.-cv.); the death of John (cvi.-cxv.). There are manifest
gaps in the narrative, a fact which we would infer from the extent
assigned to it (i.e. 2500 stichoi) by Nicephorus. According to this
authority one-third of the text is now lost. Many chapters are lost at
the beginning; there is a gap in chapter xxxvii., also before lviii.,
not to mention others. The encratite tendency in these Acts is not so
strongly developed as in those of Andrew and Thomas. James (_Anecdota_,
ii. 1-25) has given strong grounds for regarding the Acts of John and
Peter as derived from one and the same author, but there are like
affinities existing between the Acts of Peter and those of Paul. For a
discussion of this work see Zahn, _Gesch. Kanons_, ii. 856-865; Lipsius,
_Apok. Apostelgesch._ i. 348-542; Hennecke, _NT. Apokryphen_, 423-432.
For bibliography, Hennecke, _NT. Apok. Handbuch_, 492 sq.

_Acts of Paul._--The discovery of the Coptic translation of these Acts
in 1897, and its publication by C. Schmidt (_Acta Pauli aus der
Heidelberger koptischen Papyrushandschrift herausgegeben_, Leipzig,
1894), have confirmed what had been previously only a hypothesis that
the Acts of Thecla had formed a part of the larger Acts of Paul. The
Acts therefore embrace now the following elements:-(a) Two quotations
given by Origen in his _Princip._ i. 2. 3 and his comment on John xx.
12. From the latter it follows that in the Acts of Paul the death of
Peter was recounted, (b) _Apocryphal 3rd Epistle of Paul to the
Corinthians_ and _Epistle from the Corinthians to Paul_. These two
letters are connected by a short account which is intended to give the
historical situation. Paul is in prison on account of Stratonice, the
wife of Apollophanes. The Greek and Latin versions of these letters have
for the most part disappeared, but they have been preserved in Syriac,
and through Syriac they obtained for the time being a place in the
Armenian Bible immediately after 2 Corinthians. Aphraates cites two
passages from 3 Corinthians as words of the apostle, and Ephraem
expounded them in his commentary on the Pauline Epistles. They must
therefore have been regarded as canonical in the first half of the 4th
century. From the Syriac Bible they made their way into the Armenian and
maintained their place without opposition to the 7th century. On the
Latin text see Carrière and Berger, _Correspondance apocr. de S.P. et
des Corinthiens_, 1891. For a translation of Ephraem's commentary see
Zahn ii. 592-611 and Vetter, _Der Apocr. 3. Korinthien_, 70 sqq., 1894.
The Coptic version (C. Schmidt, _Acta Pauli_, pp. 74-82), which is here
imperfect, is clearly from a Greek original, while the Latin and
Armenian are from the Syriac. (c) _The Acts of Paul and Thecla_. These
were written, according to Tertullian (_De Baptismo_, 17) by a presbyter
of Asia, who was deposed from his office on account of his forgery.
This, the earliest of Christian romances (probably before A.D. 150),
recounts the adventures and sufferings of a virgin, Thecla of Iconium.
Lipsius discovers Gnostic traits in the story, but these are denied by
Zahn (_Gesch. Kanons_, ii. 902). See Lipsius, _op. cit._ ii. 424-467;
Zahn (_op. cit._ ii. 892-910). The best text is that of Lipsius, _Acta
Apostol. Apocr._, 1891, i. 235-272. There are Syriac, Arabic, Ethiopic
and Slavonic versions. As we have seen above, these Acts are now
recognized as belonging originally to the Acts of Paul. They were,
however, published separately long before the Gelasian Decree (496).
Jerome also was acquainted with them as an independent work. Thecla was
most probably a real personage, around whom a legend had already
gathered in the 2nd century. Of this legend the author of the Acts of
Paul made use, and introduced into it certain historical and
geographical facts, (d) The healing of Hermocrates of dropsy in Myra.
Through a comparison of the Coptic version with the Pseudo-Cyprian
writing "Caena," Rolffs (Hennecke, _NT. Apok._ 361) concludes that this
incident formed originally a constituent of our book, (e) The strife
with beasts at Ephesus. This event is mentioned by Nicephorus Callistus
(_H.E._ ii. 25) as recounted in the [Greek: perlodoi] of Paul. The
identity of this work with the Acts of Paul is confirmed by a remark of
Hippolytus in his commentary on Daniel iii. 29. 4, ed. Bonwetsch 176
(so Rolffs). (f) Martyrdom of Paul. The death of Paul by the sentence of
Nero at Rome forms the close of the Acts of Paul. The text is in the
utmost confusion. It is best given by Lipsius, _Acta Apostol. Apocr._ i.
104-117.

Notwithstanding all the care that has been taken in collecting the
fragments of these Acts, only about 900 stichoi out of the 3600 assigned
to them in the Stichometry of Nicephorus have as yet been recovered.

The author was, according to Tertullian (_De Baptism._ 17), a presbyter
in Asia, who out of honour to Paul wrote the Acts, forging at the same
time 3 Corinthians. Thus the work was composed before 190, and, since it
most probably uses the martyrdom of Polycarp, after 155. The object of
the writer is to embody in St Paul the model ideal of the popular
Christianity of the 2nd century. His main emphasis is laid on chastity
and the resurrection of the flesh. The tone of the work is Catholic and
anti-Gnostic. For the bibliography of the subject see Hennecke, _NT.
Apok._ 358-360.

_Acts of Peter._--These acts are first mentioned by Eusebius (_H.E._
iii. 3) by name, and first referred to by the African poet Commodian
about A.D. 250. Harnack, who was the first to show that these Acts were
Catholic in character and not Gnostic as had previously been alleged,
assigns their composition to this period mainly on the ground that
Hippolytus was not acquainted with them; but even were this assumption
true, it would not prove the non-existence of the Acts in question.
According to Photius, moreover, the Acts of Peter also were composed by
this same Leucius Charinus, who, according to Zahn (_Gesch. Kanons_, ii.
864), wrote about 160 (_op. cit._ p. 848). Schmidt and Ficker, however,
maintain that the Acts were written about 200 and in Asia Minor. These
Acts, which Ficker holds were written as a continuation and completion
of the canonical Acts of the Apostles, deal with Peter's victorious
conflict with Simon Magus, and his subsequent martyrdom at Rome under
Nero. It is difficult to determine the relation of the so-called Latin
_Actus Vercellenses_ (which there are good grounds for assuming were
originally called the [Greek: Praxeis Petrou]) with the Acts of John and
Paul. Schmidt thinks that the author of the former made use of the
latter, James that the Acts of Peter and of John were by one and the
same author, but Ficker is of opinion that their affinities can be
explained by their derivation from the same ecclesiastical atmosphere
and school of theological thought. No less close affinities exist
between our Acts and the Acts of Thomas, Andrew and Philip. In the case
of the Acts of Thomas the problem is complicated, sometimes the Acts of
Peter seem dependent on the Acts of Thomas, and sometimes the converse.

  For the relation of the _Actus Vercellenses_ to the "Martyrdom of the
  holy apostles Peter and Paul" (_Acta Apostol. Apocr._ i. 118-177) and
  to the "Acts of the holy apostles Peter and Paul" (_Acta Apostol.
  Apocr._ i. 178-234) see Lipsius ii. 1. 84 sqq. The "Acts of Xanthippe
  and Polyxena," first edited by James (_Texts and Studies_, ii. 3.
  1893), and assigned by him to the middle of the 3rd century, as well
  as the "Acts of the Disputation of Archelaus, bishop of Mesopotamia,
  and the Heresiarch Manes" ("Acta Disputationis Archelai Episcopi
  Mesopotamiae et Manetis Haeresiarchae," in Routh's _Reliquiae
  Sacrae²_, v. 36-206), have borrowed largely from our work.

  The text of the _Actus Vercellenses_ is edited by Lipsius, _Acta
  Apostol. Apocr._ i. 45-79. An independent Latin translation of the
  "Martyrdom of Peter" is published by Lipsius (_op. cit._ i. 1-22),
  _Martyrium beati Petri Apostoli a Lino episcopo conscriptum_. On the
  Coptic fragment, which Schmidt maintains is an original constituent of
  these Acts, see that writer's work: _Die alten Petrusakten im
  Zusammenhang der apokryphen Apostelliteratur nebst einem neuentdeckten
  Fragment_, and _Texte und Untersuch_. N.F. ix. 1 (1903). For the
  literature see Hennecke, _Neutestamentliche Apokryphen Handbuch_, 395
  sqq.

_Preaching of Peter._--This book ([Greek: Petrou Kêrygma]) gave the
substance of a series of discourses spoken by one person in the name of
the apostles. Clement of Alexandria quotes it several times as a genuine
record of Peter's teaching. Heracleon had previously used it (see
Origen, _In Evang. Johann._ t. xiii. 17). It is spoken unfavourably of
by Origen (_De Prin._ Praef. 8). It was probably in the hands of Justin
and Aristides. Hence Zahn gives its date as 90-100 at latest; Dobschütz,
as 100-110; and Harnack, as 110-130. The extant fragments contain
sayings of Jesus, and warnings against Judaism and Polytheism.

They have been edited by Hilgenfeld: _Nov. Test. extra Can._, 1884, iv.
51-65, and by von Dobschütz, _Das Kerygma Petri_, 1893. Salmon (_Dict.
Christ. Biog._ iv. 329-330) thinks that this work is part of a larger
work, _A Preaching of Peter and a Preaching of Paul_, implied in a
statement of Lactantius (_Inst. Div._ iv. 21); but this view is
contested by Zahn, see _Gesch. Kanons_, ii. 820-834, particularly pp.
827-828; Chase, in Hastings' _Bible Dict._ iv. 776.

_Acts of Thomas._--This is one of the earliest and most famous of the
Gnostic Acts. It has been but slightly tampered with by orthodox hands.
These Acts were used by the Encratites (Epiphanius, _Haer._ xlvii. 1),
the Manichaeans (Augustine, _Contra Faust_. xxii. 79), the Apostolici
(Epiphanius lxi. 1) and Priscillianists. The work is divided into
thirteen Acts, to which the Martyrdom of Thomas attaches as the
fourteenth. It was originally written in Syriac, as Burkitt (_Journ. of
Theol. Studies_, i. 278 sqq.) has finally proved, though Macke and
Nöldeke had previously advanced grounds for this view. The Greek and
Latin texts were edited by Bonnet in 1883 and again in 1903, ii. 2; the
Greek also by James, _Apoc. Anec._ ii. 28-45, and the Syriac by Wright
(_Apocr. Acts of the Gospels_, 1871, i. 172-333). Photius ascribes their
composition to Leucius Charinus--therefore to the 2nd century, but
Lipsius assigns it to the early decades of the 3rd. (See Lipsius,
_Apokryphen Apostelgeschichten_, i. 225-347; Hennecke, _N.T.
Apokryphen_, 473-480.)

_Teaching of the Twelve Apostles_ (Didache).--This important work was
discovered by Philotheos Bryennios in Constantinople and published in
1883. Since that date it has been frequently edited. The bibliography
can be found in Schaff's and in Harnack's editions. The book divides
itself into three parts. The first (i.-vi.) contains a body of ethical
instruction which is founded on a Jewish and probably pre-Christian
document, which forms the basis also of the _Epistle of Barnabas_. The
second part consists of vii.-xv., and treats of church ritual and
discipline; and the third part is eschatological and deals with the
second Advent. The book is variously dated by different scholars: Zahn
assigns it to the years A.D. 80-120; Harnack to 120-165; Lightfoot and
Funk to 80-100; Salmon to 120. (See Salmon in _Dict. of Christ. Biog._
iv. 806-815, also article DIDACHE.)

_Apostolical Constitutions._--For the various collections of these
ecclesiastical regulations--the Syriac _Didascalia, Ecclesiastical
Canons of the Holy Apostles_, &c.--see separate article.

(c) EPISTLES.--_The Abgar Epistles._--These epistles are found in
Eusebius (_H.E._ i. 3), who translated them from the Syriac. They are
two in number, and purport to be a petition of Abgar Uchomo, king of
Edessa, to Christ to visit Edessa, and Christ's answer, promising after
his ascension to send one of his disciples, who should "cure thee of thy
disease, and give eternal life and peace to thee and all thy people."
Lipsius thinks that these letters were manufactured about the year 200.
(See _Dict. Christ. Biog._ iv. 878-881, with the literature there
mentioned.) The above correspondence, which appears also in Syriac, is
inwoven with the legend of Addai or Thaddaeus. The best critical edition
of the Greek text will be found in Lipsius, _Acta Apostolorum
Apocrypha_, 1891, pp. 279-283. (See also ABGAR.)

_Epistle of Barnabas._--The special object of this epistle was to guard
its readers against the danger of relapsing into Judaism. The date is
placed by some scholars as early as 70-79, by others as late as the
early years of the emperor Hadrian, 117. The text has been edited by
Hilgenfeld in 1877, Gebhardt and Harnack in 1878, and Funk in 1887 and
1901. In these works will be found full bibliographies. (See further
BARNABAS.)

_Epistle of Clement._--The object of this epistle is the restoration of
harmony to the church of Corinth, which had been vexed by internal
discussions. The epistle may be safely ascribed to the years 95-96. The
writer was in all probability the bishop of Rome of that name. He is
named an apostle and his work was reckoned as canonical by Clement of
Alexandria (_Strom._ iv. 17. 105), and as late as the time of Eusebius
(_H.E._ iii. 16) it was still read in some of the churches. Critical
editions have been published by Gebhardt and Harnack, _Patr. Apost.
Op._, 1876, and in the smaller form in 1900, Lightfoot², 1890, Funk²,
1901. The Syriac version has been edited by Kennet, _Epp. of St Clement
to the Corinthians in Syriac_, 1899, and the Old Latin version by Morin,
_S. Clementis Romani ad Corinthios epistulae versio Latina
antiquissima_, 1894.

"_Clement's_" _2nd Ep. to the Corinthians._--This so-called letter of
Clement is not mentioned by any writer before Eusebius (_H. E_. iii. 38.
4). It is not a letter but really a homily written in Rome about the
middle of the 2nd century. The writer is a Gentile. Some of his
citations are derived from the Gospel to the Egyptians.

_Clement's Epistles on Virginity._--These two letters are preserved only
in Syriac which is a translation from the Greek. They are first referred
to by Epiphanius and next by Jerome. Critics have assigned them to the
middle of the 2nd century. They have been edited by Beelen, Louvain,
1856.

_Clement's Epistles to James._--On these two letters which are found in
the Clementine Homilies, see Smith's _Dict. of Christian Biography_, i.
559, 570, and Lehmann's monograph, _Die Clementischen Schriften_, Gotha,
1867, in which references will be found to other sources of information.

_Epistles of Ignatius._--There are two collections of letters bearing
the name of Ignatius, who was martyred between 105 and 117. The first
consists of seven letters addressed by Ignatius to the Ephesians,
Magnesians, Trallians, Romans, Philadelphians, Smyrnaeans and to
Polycarp. The second collection consists of the preceding extensively
interpolated, and six others of Mary to Ignatius, of Ignatius to Mary,
to the Tarsians, Antiochians, Philippians and Hero, a deacon of Antioch.
The latter collection is a pseudepigraph written in the 4th century or
the beginning of the 5th. The authenticity of the first collection also
has been denied, but the evidence appears to be against this contention.
The literature is overwhelming in its extent. See Zahn, _Patr. Apost.
Op_., 1876; Funk², _Die apostol. Väter_, 1901; Lightfoot², _Apostolic
Fathers_, 1889.

_Epistle of Polycarp._--The genuineness of this epistle stands or falls
with that of the Ignatian epistles. See article in Smith's _Dictionary
of Christian Biography_, iv. 423-431; Lightfoot, _Apostolic Fathers_, i.
629-702; also POLYCARP.

_Pauline Epistles to the Laodiceans and the Alexandrians_.--The first of
these is found only in Latin. This, according to Lightfoot (see
_Colossians³_, 272-298) and Zahn, is a translation from the Greek. Such
an epistle is mentioned in the Muratorian canon. See Zahn, _op. cit_.
ii. 566-585. The Epistle to the Alexandrians is mentioned only in the
Muratorian canon (see Zahn ii. 586-592).

  For the _Third Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians_, and _Epistle from
  the Corinthians to Paul_, see under "Acts of Paul" above.
       (R. H. C.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Judaism was long accustomed to lay claim to an esoteric
    tradition. Thus though it insisted on the exclusive canonicity of the
    24 books, it claimed the possession of an oral law handed down from
    Moses, and just as the apocryphal books overshadowed in certain
    instances the canonical scriptures, so often the oral law displaced
    the written in the regard of Judaism.

  [2] See Porter in Hastings' _Bible Dict._ i. 113

  [3] The New Testament shows undoubtedly an acquaintance with several
    of the apocryphal books. Thus James i. 19 shows dependence on Sirach
    v. 11, Hebrews i. 3 on Wisdom vii. 26, Romans ix. 21 on Wisdom xv. 7,
    2 Cor. v. 1, 4 on Wisdom ix. 15, &c.

  [4] Thus some of the additions to Daniel and the Prayer of Manasses
    are most probably derived from a Semitic original written in
    Palestine, yet in compliance with the prevailing opinion they are
    classed under Hellenistic Jewish literature. Again, the Slavonic
    Enoch goes back undoubtedly in parts to a Semitic original, though
    most of it was written by a Greek Jew in Egypt.

  [5] These editors have discovered (1907) a gospel fragment of the 2nd
    century which represents a dialogue between our Lord and a chief
    priest--a Pharisee.