BANKS AND BANKING. The word "bank," in the economic sense,
covers various meanings which all express one object, a contribution of
money for a common purpose. Thus Bacon, in his essay on _Usury_, while
explaining "how the discommodities of it may be best avoided and the
commodities retained," refers to a "bank or common stock" as an expression
with which his readers would be familiar. Originally connected with the
idea of a mound or bank of earth--hence with that of a _monte_, an Italian
word describing a heap--the term has been gradually applied to several
classes of institutions established for the general purpose of dealing with
money.

[Sidenote: Banking as a business.]

The manner in which a bank prospers is explained by David Ricardo, in his
_Proposals for an Economical and Secure Currency_, in a passage where he
tells us that a bank would never be established if it obtained no other
profits but those derived from the employment of its own capital. The real
advantage of a bank to the community it serves commences only when it
employs the capital of others. The money which a bank controls in the form
of the deposits which it receives and sometimes of the notes which it
issues, is loaned out by it again to those who desire to borrow and can
show that they may be trusted. A bank, in order to carry on business
successfully, must possess a sufficient capital of its own to give it the
standing which will enable it to collect capital belonging to others. But
this it does not hoard. It only holds the funds with which it is entrusted
till it can use them, and the use is found in the advances that it makes.
Some of the deposits merely lie with the bank till the customer draws what
he requires for his ordinary everyday wants. Some, the greater part by far,
of the deposits enable the bank to make advances to men who employ the
funds with which they are entrusted in reproductive industry, that is to
say, in a manner which not only brings back a greater value than the amount
originally lent to them, but assists the business development of the
country by setting on foot and maintaining enterprises of a profitable
description. It is possible that some part may be employed in loans
required through extravagance on the part of the borrower, but these can
only be a small proportion of the whole, as it is only through reproductive
industry that the capital advanced by a banker can really be replaced. A
loan sometimes, it is true, is repaid from the proceeds of the sale of a
security, but this only means a transfer of capital from one hand to
another; money that is not transferred in this way must be made by its
owner. Granted that the security is complete, there is only one absolute
rule as to loans if a bank desires to conduct its business on safe lines,
that the advance should not be of fixed but of floating capital. Nothing
seems simpler than such a business, but no business requires closer
attention or more strong sense and prudence in its conduct. In other ways
also, besides making loans, a well-conducted bank is of much service to the
business prosperity of a country, as for example by providing facilities
for the ready transmission of money from those who owe money to those to
whom it is due. This is particularly obvious when the debtor lives in one
town or district and the creditor in another at a considerable distance,
but the convenience is very great under any circumstances. Where an easy
method of transmission of cash does not exist, we become aware that a "rate
of exchange" exists as truly between one place and another in the same
country as between two places in different countries. The assistance that
banking gives to the industries of a community, apart from these
facilities, is constant and most valuable.

[Sidenote: Historical development.]

With these preliminary remarks on some main features of the business, we
may pass on to a sketch of the history of modern banking. Banks in Europe
from the 16th century onwards may be divided into two classes, the one
described as "exchange banks," the other as "banks of deposits." These last
are banks which, besides receiving deposits, make loans, and thus associate
themselves with the trade and general industries of a country. The exchange
banks included in former years institutions like the Bank of Hamburg and
the Bank of Amsterdam. These were established to deal with foreign exchange
and to facilitate trade with other countries. The others--founded at very
different dates--were established as, or early became, banks of deposit,
like the Bank of England, the Bank of Venice, the Bank of Sweden, the Bank
of France, the Bank of Germany and others. Some reference to these will be
made later. The exchange banks claim the first attention. Important as they
were in their day, the period of their activity is now generally past, and
the interest in their operations has become mainly historical.

In one respect, and that a very important one, the business carried on by
the exchange banks differed from banking as generally understood at the
present time. No exchange bank had a capital of its own nor did it require
any for the performance of the business. The object for which exchange
banks were established was to turn the values with which they were
entrusted into "current money," "bank money" as it was called, that is to
say, into a currency which was accepted immediately by merchants without
the necessity of testing the value of the coin or the bullion brought to
them. The "value" they provided was equal to the "value" they received, the
only difference being the amount of the small charge they made to their
customers, who gained by dealing with them more than equivalent advantages.

Short notices of the Bank of Amsterdam, which was one of the most
important, and of the Bank of Hamburg, which survived the longest, its
existence not terminating till 1873, will suffice to explain the working of
these institutions.

The Amsterdamsche Wisselbank, or exchange bank, known later as the Bank of
Amsterdam, was established by the ordinance of the city of Amsterdam of
31st January 1609. The increased commerce of Holland, which made Amsterdam
a leading city in international dealings, led to the establishment of this
bank, to which any person might bring money or bullion for deposit, and
might withdraw at pleasure the money or the worth of the bullion. The
ordinance which established the bank further required that all bills of 600
gulden (£50), or upwards--this limit was, in 1643, lowered to 300 gulden
(£25)--should be paid through the bank, or in other words, by the transfer
of deposits or credits at the bank. These transfers came afterwards to be
known as "bank money." The charge for making the transfers was the sole
source of income to the bank. The bank was established without any capital
of its own, being understood to have actually in its vaults the whole
amount of specie for which "bank money" was outstanding. This regulation
was not, however, strictly observed. Loans were made at various dates to
the Dutch East India Company. In 1795 a report was issued showing that the
city of Amsterdam was largely indebted to the bank, which held as security
the obligations of the states of Holland and West Friesland. The debt was
paid, but it was too late to revive the bank, and in 1820 "the
establishment which for generations had held the leading place in European
commerce ceased to exist." (See _Chapters on the Theory and History of
Banking_, by Charles F. Dunbar, p. 105.)

Similar banks had been established in Middelburg, (March 28th, 1616), in
Hamburg (1619) and in Rotterdam (February 9th, 1635). Of these the Bank of
Hamburg carried on much the largest business and survived the longest. It
was not till the 15th of February 1873 that its existence was closed by the
act of the German parliament which decreed that Germany should possess a
gold standard, and thus removed those conditions of the local medium of
exchange--silver coins of very different intrinsic values--whose
circulation had provided an ample field for the operations of the bank. The
business of the Bank of Hamburg had been conducted in absolute accordance
with the regulations under which it was founded.

The exchange banks were established to remedy the inconvenience to which
merchants were subject through the uncertain value of the currency of other
countries in reference to that of the city where the exchange bank carried
on its business. The following quotation from _Notes on Banking_, written
in 1873, explains the method of operation in Hamburg. "In this city, the
most vigorous offshoot of the once powerful Hansa, the latest
representative of the free commercial cities of medieval Europe, [v.03
p.0335] there still remains a representative of those older banks which
were once of the highest importance in commercial affairs. Similar
institutions greatly aided the prosperity of Venice, Genoa, Amsterdam and
Nuremberg. The Bank of Hamburg is now the last survivor of these banks,
whose business lay in the assistance of commerce, not by loans, but by the
local manufacture, so to speak, of an international coinage. In a city of
the highest rank of commercial activity, but greatly circumscribed in
territory, continually receiving payments for merchandise in the coin of
other countries, a common standard of value was a matter of primary
necessity. The invention of bank money, that is, of a money of account
which could be transferred at pleasure from one holder to another, enabled
the trade of the place to be carried on without any of those hindrances to
business which must have followed on the delay and expense attendant on the
verification of various coins differing from each other in weight,
intrinsic value, standard of purity of metal, in every point in fact in
which coins can differ from each other. By supplying a currency of
universal acceptation the Bank of Hamburg greatly contributed to the
prosperity of that city." The regulations being strictly carried out, the
currency was purely metallic; the "Mark Banco" being merely the
representative of an equal value of silver.

For the earliest example of a bank for the receipt of deposits carrying on
a business on modern lines, we must turn, as in the case of the exchange
banks, to a great commercial city of the middle ages. Private banking in
Venice began as an adjunct of the business of the _campsores_ or dealers in
foreign moneys. "As early as 1270 it was deemed necessary to require them
to give security to the government as the condition of carrying on their
business, but it is not shown that they were then receiving deposits. In an
act of the 24th of September 1318, however, entitled _Bancherii scriptae
dent plegiarias consulibus_, the receipt of deposits by the _campsores_ is
recognized as an existing practice, and provision is made for better
security for the depositors." From this act it becomes clear that between
1270 and 1318 the money-changers of Venice were becoming bankers, just as
the same class of men became in Amsterdam a couple of centuries later, and
as later still the goldsmiths in London.

[Sidenote: The first public bank in Europe.]

Of the early banks in Europe, the bank in Venice, the Banco di Rialto, was
established by the acts of the Venetian senate of 1584 and 1587. This
appears to have been the first public bank in that city and in Europe. The
senate by the act of the 3rd of May 1619[1] established by the side of the
Banco di Rialto a second public bank known as the Banco Giro, or Banco del
Giro, which ultimately became the only public bank of the city and was for
generations famous throughout Europe as the Bank of Venice. Earlier than
this the _campsores_ or dealers in foreign moneys had carried on the
business. The Bank of Venice (Banco del Giro) appears to have been called
into existence by the natural developments of trade, but some banks have
been established by governments and have been of great service to the
development of the countries in which they have carried on their business.
Of these, the Bank of Sweden (the _Riksbank_), established in 1656, is the
earliest. This bank still exists and has always been the state bank of
Sweden. It was founded by a Swede named Palmstruck, who also invented the
use of the bank note--perhaps adapted for use in Europe is the better
expression to employ, as notes were current in China about A.D. 800. The
first bank note was issued by the _Riksbank_ in 1658. An _enquête_ made by
the French government in 1729 recognizes the priority of Sweden in this
matter, and declares the bank note to be an admirable Swedish invention,
designed to facilitate commerce.

EUROPEAN COUNTRIES

[Sidenote: Foundation of the Bank of England.]

_United Kingdom_.--English banking may be traced back to the dealings in
money carried on by the goldsmiths of London and thus certainly to the 16th
century; but it has been so greatly influenced by the working of the Bank
of England and by the acts of parliament connected with that institution,
that a reference to this bank's foundation and development must precede any
attempt at a detailed history of banking in the United Kingdom. The Bank of
England was founded in 1694.[2] As in the case of some of the earlier
continental banks, a loan to the government was the origin of its
establishment. The loan, which was £1,200,000, was subscribed in little
more than ten days, between Thursday, 21st June, and noon of Monday, 2nd
July 1694. On Tuesday, 10th July, the subscribers appointed Sir John
Houblon the governor, and Michael Godfrey (who was killed during the siege
of Namur on the 17th of July 1695) deputy-governor. Michael Godfrey wrote a
pamphlet explaining the purposes for which the bank was established and the
use it would be to the country. The pamphlet supplies some curious
illustrations of the dangers which some persons had imagined might arise
from the establishment of the bank and its connexion with William III.,
deprecating the fear "lest it should hereafter joyn with the prince to make
him absolute and so render parliaments useless."

The governor and the deputy-governor, having thus been appointed, the first
twenty-four directors were elected on Wednesday, 11th July 1694. Two of
them were brothers of the governor, Sir John Houblon. They were descended
from James Houblon, a Flemish refugee who had escaped from the persecution
of Alva. All the directors were men of high mercantile standing. The
business of the bank was first carried on in the Mercers' chapel. It
continued there till the 28th of September, when they moved to Grocers'
Hall. They were tenants of the Grocers' Hall till 1732. The first stone of
the building now occupied by the bank was laid on the 1st of August 1732.
The bank has remained on the same site ever since. The structure occupied
the space previously covered by the house and gardens of Sir John Houblon,
the first governor, which had been bought for the purpose. Between 1764 and
1788 the wings were erected. In 1780 the directors, alarmed at the
dangerous facilities which the adjacent church of St Christopher le Stocks
might give to a mob, obtained parliamentary powers and acquired the fabric,
on the site of which much of the present building stands. The structure was
developed to its present form about the commencement of the 19th century.

The bank commenced business with fifty-four assistants, the salaries of
whom amounted to £4350. The total number employed in 1847 was upwards of
nine hundred and their salaries exceeded £210,000. Mr Thomson Hankey stated
that in 1867 upwards of one thousand persons were employed, and the
salaries and wages amounted to nearly £260,000, besides pensions to
superannuated clerks of about £20,000 more. The number of persons of all
classes employed in 1906 (head office and eleven branches) was about 1400.

Originally established to advance the government a loan of £1,200,000, the
management of the British national debt has been confided to the Bank of
England from the date of its foundation, and it has remained the banker of
the government ever since. The interest on the stock in which the debt is
inscribed has always been paid by the bank, originally half-yearly, now
quarterly, and the registration of all transfers of the stock itself is
carried on by the bank, which assumes the responsibility of the correctness
of these transfers. The dignity which the position of banker to the
government gives; the monopoly granted to it of being the only joint-stock
bank allowed to exist in England and Wales till 1826, while the liability
of its shareholders was limited to the amount of their holdings, an
advantage which alone of English banks it possessed till 1862; the
privilege of issuing notes which since 1833 have been legal tender in
England and Wales everywhere except at the bank itself; the fact that it is
the banker of the other banks of the country and for many years had the
control of far larger deposits than any one of them individually--all these
privileges gave it early a pre-eminence which it still maintains, though
more than one competitor now holds larger [v.03 p.0336] deposits, and
though, collectively, the deposits of the other banks of the country which
have offices in London many times overpass its own. Some idea of the
strength of its position may be gained from the fact that stocks are now
inscribed in the bank books to an amount exceeding 1250 millions sterling.

[Sidenote: Bank Charter Act.]

In one sense, the power of the Bank of England is greater now than ever. By
the act of 1844, regulating the note-issue of the country, the Bank of
England became the sole source from which legal tender notes can be
obtained; a power important at all times, but pre-eminently so in times of
pressure. The authority to supply the notes required, when the notes needed
by the public exceed in amount the limit fixed by the act of 1844, was
granted by the government at the request of the bank on three occasions
only between 1844 and 1906. Hence the Bank of England becomes the centre of
interest in times of pressure when a "treasury letter" permitting an excess
issue is required, and holds then a power the force of which can hardly be
estimated.

One main feature of the act of 1844 was the manner in which the issue of
notes was dealt with, as described by Sir Robert Peel in parliament on the
6th of May 1844:--"Two departments of the bank will be constituted: one for
the issue of notes, the other for the transaction of the ordinary business
of banking. The bullion now in the possession of the bank will be
transferred to the issue department. The issue of notes will be restricted
to an issue of £14,000,000 upon securities--the remainder being issued upon
bullion and governed in amount by the fluctuations in the stock of
bullion." The bank was required to issue weekly returns in a specified form
(previously to the act of 1844 it was necessary only to publish every month
a balance-sheet for the previous quarter), and the first of such returns
was issued on the 7th of September 1844. The old form of return contained
merely a statement of the liabilities and assets of the bank, but in the
new form the balance-sheets of the Issue Department and the Banking
Department are shown separately. A copy of the weekly return in both the
old and new forms will be found in _A History of the Bank of England_, p.
290, by A. Andréadès (Eng. trans., 1909); see also R. H. I. Palgrave, _Bank
Rate and the Money Market_, p. 297.

One result of the division of the accounts of the bank into two departments
is that, if through any circumstance the Bank of England be called on for a
_larger_ sum in notes or specie than the notes held in its banking
department (technically spoken of as the "Reserve") amount to, permission
has to be obtained from the government to "suspend the Bank Act" in order
to allow the demand to be met, whatever the amount of specie in the "issue
department" may be. Three times since the passing of the Bank Act--during
the crises of 1847, 1857 and 1866--authority has been given for the
suspension of that act. On one of these dates only, in 1857, the limits of
the act were exceeded; on the other two occasions the fact that the
permission had been given stayed the alarm. It should be remembered,
whenever the act of 1844 is criticized, that since it came into force there
has been no anxiety as to payment in specie of the note circulation; but
the division of the specie held into two parts is an arrangement not
without disadvantages. [Sidenote: Bank rate.] Certainly since the act of
1844 became law, the liability to constant fluctuations in the Bank's rate
of discount--one main characteristic of the English money market--has
greatly increased. To charge the responsibility of the increase in the
number of those fluctuations on the Bank Act alone would not be
justifiable, but the working of the act appears to have an influence in
that direction, as the effect of the act is to cut the specie reserve held
by the bank into two parts and to cause the smaller of these parts to
receive the whole strain of any demands either for notes or for specie.
Meanwhile the demands on the English money market are greater and more
continuous than those on any other money market in the world. Of late years
the changes in the bank rate have been frequent, and the fluctuations even
in ordinary years very severe. From the day when the act came into
operation in 1844, to the close of the year 1906, there had been more than
400 changes in the rate. The hopes which Sir Robert Peel expressed in 1844,
that after the act came into force commercial crises would cease, have not
been realized.

The number of changes in the bank rate from 1876[3] to 1906 in England,
France, Germany, Holland and Belgium were as follows:--

  England.  France.  Germany.  Holland.  Belgium.
    183       27       110       55        77

There has been frequent discussion among bankers and occasionally with the
government as to the advantage it might be to grant the Bank of England an
automatic power to augment the note issue on securities when necessary,
similar to that possessed by the Bank of Germany (_Reichsbank_). One of the
hindrances to the success of such a plan has been that the government,
acting on the advice of the treasury, required an extremely high rate of
interest, of which it would reap the advantage, to be paid on the advances
made under these conditions. Those who made these suggestions did not bear
in mind that the mere fact of so high a rate of interest being demanded
intensifies the panic, a high rate being associated as a rule with risks in
business. The object of the arrangement made between the _Reichsbank_ and
the treasury of the empire of Germany is a different one--to provide the
banking accommodation required and to prevent panic, hence a rate of only
5% has been generally charged, though in 1899 the rate was 7% for a short
time. As is often the case in business, a moderate rate has been
accompanied by higher profit. The duty on the extra issue between 1881,
when the circulation of the Bank of Germany first exceeded the authorized
limit, and the close of the year 1906 amounted to £839,052. Thus a
considerable sum was provided for the relief of taxation, while business
proceeded on its normal course. The proposal made by Mr Lowe (afterwards
Lord Sherbrooke) in 1873 was to charge 12%, a rate which presupposes panic.
Hence the negotiations came to nothing. The act of 1844 remains unaltered.
The issue on securities allowed by it to the Bank of England was originally
£14,000,000. This has since been increased under the provisions of the act
to £18,450,000 (29th March 1901). Hence against the notes issued by the
bank less gold by £4,450,000 is now held by the bank than would have been
the case had the arrangements as to the securities remained as they were in
1844.

The Bank of England has, from the date of its establishment, possessed a
practical, though perhaps not an absolutely legal, monopoly of issuing
notes in London. It became gradually surrounded by a circle of private
banks, some of considerable power.

[Sidenote: Early English banking.]

The state papers included in F. G. Hilton Price's _Handbook of London
Bankers_ (1876) contain some of the earliest records about the
establishment of banking in England. The first of these is a petition,
printed in the original Italian, to Queen Elizabeth, of Christopher
Hagenbuck and his partners in November 1581, representing "that he had
found out a method and form in which it will be possible to institute an
office into which shall enter every year a very large sum of money without
expense to your Majesty," so "that not only your Majesty will be able to be
always provided with whatever notable sum of money your Majesty may wish,
but by this means your State and people also; and it shall keep the country
in abundance and remove the extreme usuries that devour your Majesty and
your people." Hagenbuck proposed to explain his plan on condition that he
should receive "6% every year of the whole mass of money" received by the
office for twenty years. The queen agreed "to grant to the said Christopher
and partners 4% for a term of twenty years, and to confirm the said grant
under the great seal." The document is signed by Francis Walsingham, but
nothing further appears to have come of it. When we compare the date of
this document with that of the establishment of the Banco della Piazza di
Rialto at Venice, it is not unlikely that the idea of the establishment of
a bank was floating in the minds of people connected with business and had
become familiar to Hagenbuck from commerce with Venice. Other state papers
in 1621 and 1622 and again in 1662 and 1666 contain somewhat similar
proposals which however were never carried into practice.

The little _London Directory_, 1677, contains a list of goldsmiths
mentioned as keeping "running cashes." Of these firms described in 1677,
five houses were carrying on business in 1876. Three of these, or firms
immediately descended from them, Child & Co. of Temple Bar, Martin & Co. of
Lombard Street (as Martin's Bank, Ltd.), and Hoare & Co. of Fleet Street,
are still carrying on business. Barnetts, Hoare & Co. and Willis, Percival
& Co. have been absorbed since 1876, the first by Lloyds Bank (1884), the
second by the Capital and Counties (1878). Many of the goldsmiths carried
on a considerable business. Thus the books of Edward Blackwell, who was an
eminent goldsmith and banker in the reign of Charles II., show that the
king himself, the queen mother, Henrietta Maria, James, duke of York, the
prince of Orange, Samuel Pepys, the East India Company, the Goldsmiths'
Company and other city companies did business with him. Sir John Houblon,
the first governor of the Bank of England, kept an account with Blackwell,
who was, however, ruined by the closing of the exchequer in 1672. But his
son married into the family of Sir Francis Child, and his grandsons became
partners in Child's Bank.

[v.03 p.0337] Besides the banks in London already mentioned, one in the
provinces claims to have been established before the Bank of England.
Smiths' of Nottingham, since amalgamated with the Union of London Bank, is
stated to have been founded in 1688. Others also claim considerable
antiquity. The old Bank of Bristol (Bailey, Cave & Co.) was founded in
1750; the business amalgamated with Prescott & Co., Ltd., of London. The
Hull Old Bank (Pease & Co.) dated from 1754; this business also still
continues (amalgamated, 1894, with the York Union Banking Co., Ltd., and
since with Barclay & Co., Ltd.). The banks of Gurney & Co., established at
the end of the 18th century in the eastern counties, have with numerous
other banks of similar standing amalgamated with the firm of Barclay & Co.,
Ltd., of Lombard Street.

The business of banking had been carried on by the goldsmiths of the city,
who took deposits from the time of James I. onwards, and thus established
"deposit-banking" as early as that reign. This is described in a pamphlet
published in 1676, entitled _The Mystery of the New-Fashioned Goldsmiths or
Bankers Discovered_, quoted by Adam Anderson in his _History of the Great
Commercial Interests of the British Empire_, vol. ii. p. 402. During the
Civil War "the goldsmiths or new-fashioned bankers began to receive the
rents of gentlemen's estates remitted to town, and to allow them and others
who put cash into their hands some interest for it, if it remained but for
a single month in their hands, or even a lesser time. This was a great
allurement for people to put their money into their hands, which would bear
interest till the day they wanted it. And they could also draw it out by
£100 or £50, &c., at a time, as they wanted it, with infinitely less
trouble than if they had lent it out on either real or personal security.
The consequence was that it quickly brought a great quantity of cash into
their hands; so that the chief or greatest of them were now enabled to
supply Cromwell with money in advance on the revenues as his occasion
required, upon great advantage to themselves."

The Bank of England, as stated before, was incorporated by the act of 1694.
The position of the other banks at that time was defined by that act and
the act of 1697, which declared that no bank, that is, no joint-stock bank,
was "to be established within England during the continuance of the Bank of
England," and also by the act of 1708, which provided that "during the
continuance of the Bank of England, no company or partnership exceeding six
persons in England" should "borrow, owe or take up any sum or sums of money
on their bills or notes payable on demand or at any less time than six
months from the borrowing thereof." This was confirmed by the act of 1800.
No change of importance was made till the act of 1826, which prohibited
"bank notes under £5," and the second Banking Act of that year which
allowed the establishment of co-partnerships of more than six persons,
which necessarily were joint-stock companies, beyond 65 m. from London. The
act of 1833 allowed the establishment of joint-stock banks within the 65 m.
limit, and took away various restrictions of the amounts of notes for less
than £50. But the power of issuing notes was not allowed to joint-stock
banks within the 65 m. radius.

In the early days in England, issuing notes formed, as Bagehot says in his
_Lombard Street_, the introduction to the system of deposit-banking--so
much so, that a bank which had not the power of issuing notes could
scarcely exist out of London.

[Sidenote: Bank notes.]

Bank notes in England originated in goldsmiths' notes. Goldsmiths received
deposits of moneys and gave notes or receipts for such moneys payable on
demand. The London bankers continued to give their customers notes or
deposit-receipts for the sums left by them until about 1781, when in lieu
of such notes they gave them books of cheques. Before the invention of
cheque-books, the practice of issuing notes was considered so essentially
the main feature of banking, that a prohibition of issue was considered an
effectual bar against banking. Accordingly the prohibitory clause in the
act of 6 Anne, c. 50, 1707 (in Record edition), which was repeated in the
Bank of England Act 1708, 7 Anne, c. 30, § 66 (in Record edition),
prohibiting more than six persons from issuing promissory notes, was
intended to prevent any bank being formed with more than six partners, and
was so understood at the time; and it did have the effect of preventing any
joint-stock bank being formed.

The prohibition, as already related, was modified in the year 1826 and
removed in 1833. Even then the privilege of limitation of liability was not
permitted to any other bank but the Bank of England. The result was that
when joint-stock banks were first formed many persons of good means were
kept back from becoming shareholders, that is to say partners, in banks.
For up to the date of the act of 1862 permitting "limited liability," every
shareholder in a joint-stock bank was liable to the extent of the whole of
his means (see the article COMPANY). Even as late as 1858 when the Western
Bank of Scotland and 1878 when the City of Glasgow Bank failed, very great
hardship was inflicted on many persons who had trusted with over confidence
to the management of those banks. The failure of the City of Glasgow Bank
was the cause of the Companies Act of 1879, passed to enable unlimited
companies to adopt limited liability. In limited companies the shareholder
who has paid up the nominal amount of his holding is not liable for any
further amount, unless the company issues bank notes, in which case the
shareholders are liable in the same way as if the company were registered
as an unlimited company. The facilities allowed by this act were used by
almost every joint-stock bank in the United Kingdom except those banks
which were at that date limited by charter or by special act.

[Sidenote: Private banks.]

To return to the early history of banking--thus, as no bank could be formed
with more than six partners during the whole of the period from 1694 to
1826 and 1833, the majority of the banks formed throughout England and
Wales for more than a century were necessarily small and usually isolated
firms. Further, when a partner died, his capital not infrequently went out
of the business; then a fresh partner with sufficient means had to be
found, constant change was the result, and confidence, "a plant of slow
growth," could not thrive, except in those instances when a son or a
relation filled the vacancy.

The banks in the country districts had frequently branches in the small
market-towns close to them; those in London had never more than one office.
These banks were sometimes powerful and generally well managed, a
considerable number being established by members of the Society of Friends.

The restriction of partners in private banks to the number of six continued
till 1862. By the act of that year they were allowed to be ten. This power,
however, did not extend to issuing private banks, which were restricted to
six partners as before. The power of increasing bank partnerships to ten
has been made but little use of. The difficulties of carrying on business
on a large scale by private firms were augmented by certain legal
technicalities which practically rendered large private banks impossible in
ordinary circumstances. Hence banking business did not begin to assume its
present form till almost half-way through the 19th century. The gradual
change followed the passing of the acts of 1826-1833, of 1844-1845, of 1862
and of 1879. Incidentally the act of 1844 had an unexpected influence on
the constitution of the banking system. After favouring the existence of
small banks for many years, it gradually led, as the time arrived when the
establishment of large and powerful banks in England and Wales became
necessary, to their formation. No new bank of issue whatever was allowed to
be established--restrictions were placed on the English issuing
banks--private issuing banks with not more than six partners were allowed
to remain, to amalgamate with other private issuing banks and to retain
their joint issues. The joint-stock banks which possessed issues were also
allowed to continue these, but when two joint-stock banks amalgamated, the
continuing bank only retained its issue. Also when a private issuing bank
was formed into or joined a joint-stock bank, the issue lapsed.

The greater number of the provincial banks in England and Wales had been
banks of issue up to 1844. The act of 1844 [v.03 p.0338] restricted their
power of issuing notes, which at that date and even subsequently continued
to be of importance to them, in such a manner that, as Sir R. H. Inglis
Palgrave stated in giving evidence before the committee of the House of
Commons at the banking inquiry of 1875, these banks possessed in their
issues a property they could use, but were not able to sell. The statistics
forming part of Appendix 14 to the report of the select committee of the
House of Commons on banks of issue (1875) give interesting information as
to the proportion of notes in circulation to the deposits of banks in
various districts of the country and at various dates. The statements were
supplied by twenty-one banks, some in agricultural districts, some in
places where manufactures flourished, some in mixed districts, commercial
and agricultural, or industrial and manufacturing. In all of these, the
inquiry being carried as far back as 1844, the proportion of the
circulation to the banking deposits had greatly diminished in recent years.
In several cases the deposits had increased three-fold in the time. In one
case it was five times as large, in another nearly seven times, in another
nearly twelve and a half times. The proportion of the circulation to the
deposits had very largely diminished in that time. In one instance, from
being about one-third of the deposits, at which proportion it had remained
for five years consecutively, it fell to 9% at the end of the term. In
another from being 22% it had diminished to 1½% of the total. In all cases
where the detail was given it had diminished greatly.

The Bank Act of 1844 was arranged with the intention of concentrating the
note issues on the Bank of England in order to secure the monopoly of that
bank as the one issuer in England and Wales. The result was that nearly all
the provincial banks in England had by 1906 lost the right of issue.
Doubtless all were destined to do so before long, a result by which banking
in England and the industries of the country must lose the advantage which
the local issues have been to Scotland and Ireland. Had the English country
banks been allowed, as the Scottish banks were, to associate together and
to retain their issues, powerful banks would many years since have been
established throughout England and Wales, and the amalgamations of recent
years would have been carried through at a much earlier date, and on terms
much more favourable to the public.

[Sidenote: Security of note issue.]

No security was ever required to be given for the local issues in the
United Kingdom. The provisions of the acts of 1844-1845 which compel the
Irish and Scottish banks to hold specie against the notes issued beyond the
legal limit, do not make the coin held a security for them. The legislation
of 1879 which made the note issues a first charge, with unlimited
liability, on the total assets of the joint-stock banks which accepted the
principle of limited liability for the rest of their business, has been the
only recognition by the state of the duty to the note-holders of rendering
them secure. It has been a real disadvantage to England that this duty has
never been sufficiently recognized, and that the provincial note issue,
which is a very convenient power for a bank to possess, and incidentally a
considerable advantage to its customers, has been swept away without any
attempt being made to remedy its deficiencies. There may be objections
raised to a note circulation secured by the bonds of the government, but
the security of the note issues of the national banks of the United States
made against such bonds, has scarcely ever been questioned.

A different policy was followed by Sir Robert Peel in Scotland and in
Ireland from that which he established in England. By the acts of 1844-1845
the Scottish and Irish banks were allowed to exceed their authorized issues
on holding specie to the amount of the excess, and no restrictions were
placed on amalgamations among banks in these countries. In Scotland and in
Ireland notes for less than £5 continued to be allowed. The result has been
that the ten large banks in Scotland, and six of the nine banks in Ireland,
possess the power of issuing notes. The large proportion of local branches
in these countries has been greatly assisted by this power.

[Sidenote: Amounts in circulation.]

Originally, besides the Bank of England, nearly all the provincial banks in
England and Wales possessed the privilege of issue. These banks continued
their operations as previously during the time while the Bank Act was
discussed in parliament. When the arrangements which that act created were
made public, nine banks, of which eight were private and one was a
joint-stock bank, ceased to issue their notes prior to the 12th of October
1844, when the act came into operation. Of these, the Western District
Joint-Stock Banking Co. was dissolved, one of the private banks was closed,
the remaining seven issued Bank of England notes and were allowed certain
privileges for doing this. By the act of 1844 the maximum circulation of
the English issuing banks was fixed at the average circulation of the
twelve weeks before the 27th of April 1844.

The number of the banks to which the privilege of circulation was then
allowed and the amount of notes permitted were, in England:--

  207 private banks with an authorized issue of       £5,153,417
   72 joint-stock banks with an authorized issue of    3,478,230
                                                     ------------
                                                      £8,631,647

The actual circulation of the country in October 1844 was as follows:--

_Notes in Circulation_.--The monthly return of the circulation ending the
12th of October 1844 (stamps and taxes, 25th October);

                    _England._
  Bank of England                          £20,228,800
  Private banks                              4,674,162
  Joint-stock banks                          3,331,516

                    _Scotland._
  Chartered, private and joint-stock banks   2,987,665

                    _Ireland._
  Bank of Ireland                            3,597,850
  Private and joint-stock banks              2,456,261
                                           -----------
                     Total                 £37,276,254

In May 1907 the number and amounts were reduced to:--

                       Authorized Issue.     Actual Issue.
  12 private banks          £482,744           £122,536
  17 joint-stock banks     1,084,836            437,693

The reason why the actual circulation of these banks is so far below the
authorized issue is that under existing circumstances their circulation can
only extend over a very limited area. The notes of country banks are now
almost unknown except in the immediate neighbourhood of the places where
they are issued; though they may all be payable in London, yet there is
often considerable difficulty in getting them cashed.

The average circulation in 1906 was as follows:--

  Bank of England                          £28,890,000
  Private banks                                124,000
  Joint-stock banks                            429,000
                                           -----------
              Total in England             £29,443,000
  Scotland                                   7,477,000
  Ireland                                    6,452,000
                                           -----------
              Total in United Kingdom      £43,372,000

This shows an apparent increase of more than £6,000,000 since 1844. The
decrease of the country circulation in England and the increase of the
Scottish and Irish circulations may be set off against each other. The
increase is mainly in the notes of the Bank of England. In 1844 the number
of banking offices in England and Wales was 976, while in 1906 there were
more than 5880. Each of these offices must hold some till-money, and of
this Bank of England notes almost always form a part. Hence it is probable
that a large part of the increase in the circulation of the Bank of England
since 1844 is held in the tills of the banks in England and Wales, and that
the active note circulation of the United Kingdom is but little larger than
it was.

It may be added that the government received from the note circulation for
a typical year (ending 5th of April 1904), out of the profits of issue
(Bank of England) £184,930, 2s. 2d., and also composition for the duties on
the bills and notes of the banks of England and Ireland and of country
bankers, £120,768, 18s. 6d.

In 1906 the banking business of England was carried on practically by about
ten private and sixty joint-stock banks of which more than one was properly
a private firm under a joint-stock form of organization. Though the number
of individual banks had diminished, the offices had greatly increased.

The records of the numbers of banks in the United Kingdom have up to quite
recent years been very imperfect. Such as exist were made by individual
observers. The banks of England and Wales are believed to have been 350 in
number in 1792. Those registered from 1826 to 1842 were:--

[v.03 p.0339] /*    Private. Joint-stock. 1826 554 ... 1827 465 6 1833 416
35 1842 311 118 */

The number of banking offices in England and Wales was estimated by Mr.
William Leatham in 1840 as being 697. The _Banking Almanac_ for 1845 gives
the number in 1844 for England and Wales as 336 private bank offices and
640 joint-stock offices, Scotland 368 offices, Ireland 180 offices.

The number of inhabitants to each office was as follows in 1844 and 1906:--

  +-------------------+-------------+----------------+
  |                   |  Number of  |    Number of   |
  |                   |   Banking   | Inhabitants to |
  |                   |   Offices.  |   Each Office. |
  +-------------------+------+------+---------+------+
  |                   | 1844.| 1906.|   1844. | 1906.|
  | England and Wales |  976 | 5527 |  16,305 | 5885 |
  | Isle of Man       |  ... |   23 |    ...  | 2417 |
  | Scotland          |  368 | 1180 |   7,120 | 3790 |
  | Ireland           |  180 |  777 |  45,417 | 5738 |
  +-------------------+------+------+---------+------+
  | In United Kingdom | 1524 | 7507 |  17,526 | 5530 |
  +-------------------+------+------+---------+------+

In the latter years of the 18th century and the early years of the 19th,
the note circulation was a very important part of the business, but about
that date the deposits began to be, as they have continued since, far more
important. It is unfortunately impossible to give any trustworthy
statistics of the position of banking in the United Kingdom extending back
for more than forty or fifty years. Even the Scottish banks, who have been
less reticent as to their position than the English banks, did not publish
their accounts generally till 1865. The figures of the total deposits and
cash balances in the Irish joint-stock banks were published collectively
from the year 1840 by the care of Dr Neilson Hancock, but it is only of
quite recent years that any statement of the general position other than an
estimate has been possible owing to the long-continued reluctance of many
banks to allow any publication of their balance-sheets. A paper by W.
Newmarch, printed in the _Journal of the Statistical Society_ for 1851,
supplies the earliest basis for a trustworthy estimate. According to this
the total amount of deposits, including the Bank of England, in England and
Wales, Scotland and Ireland, may have been at that date from £250,000,000
to £360,000,000. The estimate in Palgrave's _Notes on Banking_ (1872),
excluding deposits in discount houses and the capitals of banks, was from
£430,000,000 to £450,000,000. The corresponding amounts at the close of
1906 were, in round figures, including acceptances &c., £997,000,000. The
total resources, including capitals and reserves and note circulation (in
round figures £177,500,000), were for 1906:--

  England and Wales--
     Bank of England and other banks   £922,297,000
  Scotland                              135,042,000
  Ireland                                73,707,000
  Isle of Man                               898,000
                                      -------------
                                     £1,131,944,000

The progressive growth in bank deposits since it has been possible to keep
a record of their amounts, affords some means of checking roughly the
correctness of the estimates of 1851 and 1872. Broadly speaking, it may be
said that the bank deposits of the United Kingdom have about doubled since
1872.

[Sidenote: Clearing.]

The purely city banks had associated themselves in a "Clearing House"
certainly by 1776. An entry in the books of the Grasshopper,[4]
namely--"1773 to quarterly charge for use of the Clearing-room of 19/6d.,"
points to an earlier and perhaps less definitely organized system of
settlement. A house was taken for the purpose in 1810, in which year the
number of banking houses who settled their accounts with each other at the
"Clearing House" was forty-six (Gilbart's _History and Principles of
Banking_, p. 78). The Bank of England has never been a member of the
Clearing House, though it "clears on one side," _i.e._ its claim on the
clearing bankers is made through the Clearing House, but the claims of the
clearing bankers on the bank are forwarded direct to Threadneedle Street
twice or thrice daily. Nor did the banks in Fleet Street or at Charing
Cross belong to it. In 1858 the clearing of country cheques was added
through arrangements made by Lord Avebury, then Sir John Lubbock. The
"country clearing" is a great assistance to business, as it enables a
cheque drawn on the most distant village in England to be dealt with as
conveniently as a cheque on London. Of the forty-nine banks in London in
1844, twenty-six were connected with the Clearing House. At that time only
private banks were allowed to be members. In 1854 the joint-stock banks
made their way into that body, and in 1906 the numbers were one private
bank and eighteen joint-stock banks who joined in the clearing--nineteen
banks in all.

Practically at the present time every large transaction in the United
Kingdom is settled by cheque, that is, by a series of ledger transfers,
notes and specie being but the small change by which the fractional amounts
are paid. A large proportion of these transactions are arranged through the
operation of the London Clearing House. This is facilitated by the fact
that every bank in the United Kingdom has an agent in London.

The annual circulation shown by the London Clearing House is more than
£12,000,000,000. No one asks what stock of gold is held by the bank on
which the cheques are drawn, or what the bank itself keeps in reserve. The
whole is taken in faith on a well-founded trust. It is the most easily
worked paper circulation and circulating medium in existence. Like the
marvellous tent of the fairy Paribanou, it expands itself to meet every
want and contracts again the moment the strain is passed. (See the article
by R. H. Inglis Palgrave on "Gold and the Banks," _Quarterly Review_,
January 1906.)

If we add to the returns of the London Clearing House those of the clearing
houses in the large towns of England, Ireland and Scotland, and the
numerous exchanges which occur daily, and the large number which the
different offices of banks with a great many branches settle among
themselves, and the number drawn by one customer of a bank and paid to
another, we may form some notion of the vast amount of the yearly turnover
in cheques. This may be roughly estimated to be at least twice as great as
that registered by the London Clearing House. The earliest authentic
statement as to the clearing is found in the _Appendix to the Second
Report, Committee of House of Commons, Banks of Issue_ (1841).

  In 1839 the figures of the London clearings
    were                                        £954,401,600, 29 banks.
  In 1840        "     "  "     "       "        978,496,800, 29   "
  In 1899        "     "  "     "       "      9,150,269,000, 19   "
  In 1900        "     "  "     "       "      8,960,170,000, 19   "
  In 1906        "     "  "     "       "     12,711,334,000, 18   "

[Sidenote: Scottish banks.]

In 1695, shortly after the establishment of the Bank of England, the
Scottish parliament passed an act for the establishment of a public bank.
Amongst the first names is that of Thomas Coutts, a name still commemorated
in one of the most substantial banks in London. The terms of the
establishment were more favourable than those connected with the
establishment of the Bank of England, for they obtained the exclusive
privilege of banking for twenty-one years without giving any consideration
whatever. It may have been the natural caution of the country, or the fact
that William III. was then king, which led to the Bank of Scotland being
prohibited under a heavy penalty from lending money under any circumstances
to the king. It is the only Scottish bank established by act of parliament.
The directors began at a very early period to receive deposits and to allow
interest thereon, also to grant cash credit accounts, a minute of the
directors respecting the mode of keeping the latter being dated so far back
as 1729.

Though the system of branches forms now so marked a feature of banking in
Scotland, a good many years had to pass before they obtained any hold. It
was not till about the year 1700 that the directors of the Bank of Scotland
established branches at Glasgow, Aberdeen, Dundee and Montrose, but so
little encouragement was given to these branches, the expenses far
exceeding the profits arising from them, that the directors resolved to
close them. In 1731 another attempt was made, and agencies were established
at Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dundee. But after a trial of two years they were
discontinued. It was not till 1774 that branches were again established by
the bank.

Soon after the establishment of the Bank of Scotland the directors began to
issue notes, or, as they were then called, bills or tickets, for £100, £50,
£20, £10, and £5. In 1704 £1 notes were issued for the first time. In 1727
the Royal Bank of Scotland was established by a charter of
incorporation,--which granted them "perpetual succession and a common
seal." There was a great rivalry between the two companies. The British
Linen Company was incorporated in 1746 for the [v.03 p.0340] purpose of
undertaking the manufacture of linen, but by 1763 they found it best to
confine their operations to banking transactions. This bank also was
incorporated by charter.

The note circulation was always an important item in the Scottish banks.
Thus in the case of the Bank of Dundee, the receiving money from the public
did not commence till 1792. Up to that time the whole business of the bank
from 1764 onwards, twenty-eight years in all, had consisted in its issue of
notes, which had varied from about £23,000 to £56,000. The Bank of Dundee
was amalgamated with the Royal Bank of Scotland in 1864, when its deposits
amounted in round figures to £700,000 and its note circulation to £41,000.
After 1792, the money deposited with the banks in Scotland rapidly
increased, but the habit of hoarding savings in a chest up to amounts of
£10 or £20 continued to a much later period (_History of the Dundee Banking
Co._).

Private banking never appears to have had any considerable hold in
Scotland. In 1819 eight private banks were in existence. These had all
disappeared by 1844. In 1906 there were only ten banks of issue in
Scotland, which practically carried on the whole business of the country.
There were two other small banks established comparatively recently. These
ten banks had, in 1906, 1180 branches.

The history of the growth and expansion of Scottish banking since 1826 is,
as far as can be traced, as follows:--

  +------+---------------+----------------------------------------+
  | Date.|   Deposits.   |        Number of Offices.              |
  +------+---------------+----------------------------------------+
  | 1826 | £21,000,000   |   167 = 1 to every 13,170 inhabitants. |
  |      |               |                                        |
  | 1841 |  27,000,000   |   380 = 1 to every  6,600 inhabitants. |
  |      |               |                                        |
  | 1856 |  63,000,000   |   585 = 1 to every  5,230 inhabitants. |
  |      | and capital   |                                        |
  |      |               |                                        |
  | 1872 |  92,000,000   |   790 = 1 to every  4,250 inhabitants. |
  |      | including all |                                        |
  |      | liabilities   |                                        |
  |      | and capital   |                                        |
  |      |               |                                        |
  | 1906 | 135,042,000   | 1,180 = 1 to every  3,790 inhabitants. |
  |      | including all |                                        |
  |      | liabilities   |                                        |
  |      | and capital   |                                        |
  +------+---------------+----------------------------------------+

Against every note issued in excess of the limit allowed by the acts of
1844-1845, gold has to be held at the offices of the issuing banks in
Scotland and Ireland. The amount of the specie to be thus held was, as
explained by Sir Robert Peel in his speech of the 25th of April 1845, to be
ascertained by the average amount of the note-issue for four weeks
preceding. The object of the holding of this amount of specie by the bank
which issued the notes was designed by Sir Robert Peel to cause the
circulating medium of the country, being partly of notes and partly of
specie, to fluctuate in the same manner as if it had been a metallic
circulation only. The specie held in Scotland and Ireland against the
note-issue is not a special security for the note circulation, but is
placed in the banks there for this purpose. The influence ascribed to the
working of the note circulation in the earlier part of the 19th century
accounts for this legislation, which, as Sir Robert Peel stated in his
speech of the 6th of May 1844, was intended to "ensure the uniform
equivalency of bank notes to coin." It is not applicable to the present
position of the circulating medium of the United Kingdom, which now
consists mainly of a circulation of cheques. This differs absolutely from
what was contemplated by Sir Robert Peel; no attempt is or can be made to
cause such a paper circulation to fluctuate as if it were one of specie
only. One result of the limitation of the power of note-issue to the banks
in Scotland which possessed that power in 1845 has been that no important
bank has been established in that country since. Notes are so largely
employed in ordinary business in Scotland that a bank which does not
possess the power, practically cannot carry on business and supply the
needs of its customers. This limitation in the number of the banks has,
however, not been accompanied by any deficiency in the supply of banking
accommodation to the people. There is a larger number of banking offices in
proportion to the population in Scotland than in England and Wales or
Ireland.

The large number of branches must, however, be a cause of great expense,
and in several other respects it is obvious that a business carried on in
such thinly peopled districts as are found in many parts of Scotland, must
be conducted at a disadvantage in comparison with those banks which deal
with more active centres of commerce. Although the profit derived from
their large issue of notes may be thought to be considerable, yet, when we
consider the many expenses incurred in conducting a large note circulation,
the cost of printing, stamp duty, and the charges on importing gold from
London when the circulation exceeds the limit fixed by the act of 1845. no
small deductions must be made from the apparent profit to be derived from
this head, if there is any direct profit at all.

On the other hand, the great number of branches possessed by the Scottish
banks tends beyond doubt to their stability and prosperity. The network of
banks on the surface of Scotland is as important to the development of the
prosperity of the country as the network of the railways. It has caused a
great economy of capital, as the universal practice of people, even of the
most moderate means, is to lodge their money with the banks.

[Sidenote: Irish banks.]

The early history of banking in Ireland was marked by legislation even less
favourable to the formation of a steady and dependable system than in
England, and in 1695 several of the principal merchants in Dublin met
together for the purpose of forming a public bank for Ireland on the model
of the Bank of England. For many years this proposal met with no favour. It
was not till 1783 that the Bank of Ireland was established and commenced
its business. The first governor was David La Touche, junior, and two other
members of his family were amongst the first board of directors. The bank
met with very great success, but the jealousy against rival establishments
was extreme. By the act forming the Bank of Ireland it was enacted that no
company or society exceeding six in number, except the Bank of Ireland,
should borrow or take up money on their bills or notes payable on demand.
In the year 1821 the act was so far modified as to permit the establishment
of banking companies exceeding six in number at a distance of 50 m. from
Dublin. In 1824, in consequence of the ambiguity of that act, an act had to
be passed to explain it. It was not till 1845 that the restriction as to
the 50-m. limit was withdrawn.

The establishment of any other bank but the Bank of Ireland was for a long
time hindered by the legislation on the subject. Some of the restrictions
were so extraordinary that it will be interesting to refer to three of the
more important acts.

1741, 15 Geo. II.--Partnerships authorized for the purpose of trade and
manufacture; but such partnerships were not to exceed nine in number, nor
was the capital stock of such co-partnership to exceed, at any time, the
sum of £10,000.

1780-1781, 21 and 22 Geo. III.--"Anonymous Partnership Act,"--limited
liability not to exceed £50,000, but "business of banking or discounters of
money" expressly excluded.

1759, 33 Geo. II.--By this act a person while he continued a banker could
not make a marriage settlement on a son or daughter, a grandson or
granddaughter, so as to be good against his creditors, though for a
valuable consideration, and though such creditors were not creditors at the
time the grant was made. This act gave power to creditors over all
conveyances by bankers affecting real estates; and all dispositions after
the 10th of May 1760 by bankers of real or leasehold interest therein to or
for children were made void as against creditors, though for valuable
consideration and though not creditors at the time. No banker to issue
notes or receipts bearing interest after the 10th of May 1760. Some of
these enactments appear to be in force at the present day; suggestions have
been made, though apparently unsuccessfully, for their repeal.

So extraordinary were the views of the common people that a banker in
Dublin of the name of Beresford having made himself very unpopular, a
"large assemblage of ignorant country people having previously collected a
quantity of Beresford's notes, publicly burnt them, crying out with
enthusiasm while the promises to pay on demand were consuming, 'What will
he do now; his bank will surely break.'"

The number of banks which failed in Ireland in earlier times was
extraordinary; thus Sir Robert Peel in his speech of the 9th of June 1845
on the Bank Act of that year, made a quotation "from the report of the
committee of Irish exchanges, which sat in 1804. At that period there were
fifty registered banks, but they all failed, and their failures, I know
personally, led to the most fearful distress." Since the legislation of
1845, however, the business has been carried on with equally extraordinary
steadiness and success, and at the present time is on a footing fully equal
to that of any other part of the United Kingdom.

The earlier history of banking in Ireland pursued very closely the same
process of development as in England. Circulation preceded and fed
deposits. The credit which the banks obtained [v.03 p.0341] by the ready
acceptance of their notes brought customers to their counters, and thus the
existing system, fortunate in excellent managers, was built up gradually
and surely.

Alone in the three kingdoms, Ireland maintains the same limit of authorized
circulation as that established by Peel's Act of 1845. Not one of the six
banks which had the privilege of issue at that period has lost it since.

The names of the banks carrying on business in Ireland, the years when they
were established and their position in 1906, are as follows:--

        CAPITAL OF IRISH JOINT-STOCK BANKS IN 1906
  +---------------------------+------------+------------+
  |                           |            | Rate of    |
  | Name of Bank and Year     |   Capital  | Dividend   |
  | when established.         |   paid-up. | per annum. |
  +---------------------------+------------+------------+
  | Bank of Ireland      1783 | £2,769,230 |    11      |
  | Hibernian Bank*      1824 |    500,000 |    10      |
  | Provincial Bank      1825 |    540,000 |    20      |
  | Northern Banking Co. 1825 |    500,000 |    18½     |
  | Belfast Banking Co.  1827 |    500,000 |    36      |
  | National Bank        1835 |  1,500,000 |     8      |
  | Ulster Banking Co.   1836 |    500,000 |    18      |
  | Royal Bank*          1836 |    300,000 |    12      |
  | Munster Bank, Ltd.*  1864 |    200,000 |     8      |
  +---------------------------+------------+------------+
           * Thus marked are not banks of issue.

[Sidenote: Banking crises]

Banking, like every other business, has to pass through periods of
difficulty. The severity of these in the case of banking is intensified by
the vast number of interests affected. These, on the one hand, are
world-wide in their scope, on the other they touch every home in the
country. The stringency of such a time in England has since the passing of
the act of 1844 been greatly enhanced by a doubt being sometimes felt as to
whether a relaxation of the act of 1844 would be allowed. In any case, some
little time must elapse before the assent of the ministers of the crown to
the request of the Bank of England can be known. Since 1844 there have been
five periods of pressure,--during 1847, 1857, 1866, 1870 and 1890. Of these
in three, 1847, 1857 and 1866, the difficulties reached panic.

The crisis of 1847 was brought on by the speculation in railway enterprise
which had gone on since 1845. So little had the anxieties of the autumn
been anticipated that the bank rate of discount was 3% on the 1st of
January. It was raised to 3½% on the 14th and to 4% on the 21st. It became
5% on 8th April, 5½% on 5th August, 6% on 30th September and 8% on 25th
October. This was the highest. It was lowered to 7% on 22nd November, on
2nd December to 6% and on 23rd December to 5%. An announcement was made on
the 1st of October that no advances would be made on public securities.
This was followed by general anxiety and alarm.

The reserve of the bank was rapidly reduced to a very low ebb.

  _Bank of England Reserve of Specie._
  1847, 16th October ....  £3,070,000
    "   23rd October ....   1,990,000
    "   30th October ....   1,600,000

Meanwhile the anxiety and alarm prevailing were causing a general hoarding
of coin and bank notes, and it really appeared not unlikely that the
banking department of the Bank of England might be compelled to stop
payment while there was more than £6,000,000 of specie in the issue
department. The chancellor of the exchequer (Sir C. Wood, afterwards Lord
Halifax) was urged by many deputations and remonstrances to relax the Bank
Act, but he declined. At last, on the 22nd or 23rd of October, some of the
leading city bankers had an interview with the prime minister (Lord John,
afterwards Earl, Russell), and on their explaining the necessities of the
position, the desired relaxation was given. The official letter (25th
October) recommended "the directors of the Bank of England, in the present
emergency, to enlarge the amount of their discounts and advances upon
approved security." A high rate, 8%, was to be charged to keep these
operations within reasonable limits; a bill of indemnity was promised if
the arrangement led to a breach of the law. The extra profit derived was to
be for the benefit of the public. The effect of the government letter in
allaying the panic was complete.

The crisis of 1857 was the last occasion of an official inquiry. This is
contained in the _Report and Evidence of the Select Committee of the House
of Commons on the Bank Acts_ (1857, 1858). The evidence given by Mr
Sheffield Neave, the governor, and Mr Bonamy Dobree, deputy-governor of the
bank in 1858, gives a vivid picture not only of what occurred, but of what
might be expected to recur on such occasions. The wildest alarm prevailed,
exchequer bills were scarcely saleable, and the bank itself sold £3,000,000
government securities at a considerable loss.

The extreme pressure was relaxed by the letter issued by the government on
the 12th of November 1857, signed by Lord Palmerston, then premier, and Sir
G. C. Lewis, which allowed a temporary relaxation of the Bank Act of 1844.
The public alarm, however, was so great that it was not until the 21st of
November that the severity of the pressure was in any way diminished. On
the 20th of November the notes issued to the public on securities beyond
the statutory limit (then £14,475,000) reached the sum of £928,000. By the
next week the issue was almost down to the limit, and in the week following
it was within the limit. On the 1st of January 1858 the bank rate was
lowered to 8% and the anxiety gradually passed away. Had the treasury
letter been issued earlier, the pressure might not have been so severe, and
the governor of the bank expressed a strong opinion that, if it had been
later, it would not have been sufficient. November 1857 was the only
occasion when the limits of the Bank Act as to issue were actually passed.

During the crisis of May 1866 £4,000,000 left the bank on one day in notes
and coin, and the reserve of the bank was reduced in the return of the 1st
of June of that year to £415,000. The bank rate was raised to 10% and
permission was given by the government to suspend the act. This, however,
was not done. Tradition says that the bank asked the bankers, during the
period of heaviest pressure of that terrible crisis--pressure more severe
than anything that had taken place before or that has occurred since, to
pay in every night the notes they had drawn out in the morning which were
still in their tills at the close of the day, and that hence the legal
limit was never exceeded. But it was not till the 6th of August that the
rate was reduced to 8%.

The effect of the crisis of October 1890 was far less severe. This was due
to the judgment and skill displayed by the governor (Mr Lidderdale) and the
directors of the bank, who imported £3,000,000 in gold from Paris. The
reserve in that year never dropped below £10,000,000, and before the end of
November the anxiety had greatly passed away. "Caution prevailed, but not
panic, and the distinction is a very clear one." (See arts. on "Crises,"
_Dictionary of Political Economy_, vol. i.)

The most important requirement of banking in the United Kingdom is still
the establishment of an efficient specie reserve. The reserve in the
banking department of the Bank of England averaged:--

    £8,500,000 in 1845.   £11,600,000 in 1875.
     8,400,000 in 1855.    15,100,000 in 1885.
     8,000,000 in 1865.    29,900,000 in 1895.
              £23,500,000 in 1906.

[Sidenote: The "Reserve" question.]

This provides but a narrow basis for the whole business requirements of the
country. Though much larger than in several previous years, it cannot be
regarded as adequate. The figures fluctuate more severely than these
decennial averages show, and the progress has not been one of uniform
increase. Thus the £15,100,000 in 1885 was followed by £12,700,000 in 1888.
The £29,900,000 of 1895 was followed by £34,600,000 in 1896 and £21,200,000
in 1899.

Beyond, or side by side with, the reserve of the Bank of England there are
the reserves held by the other banks. Part of these are held in the form of
balances at the Bank of England, part in specie and bank notes in their own
tills. The latter, hence, are not unlikely to be estimated twice over. The
published figures on this point are meagre.

The expectations expressed by Sir Robert Peel in his speech [v.03 p.0342]
on the bank charter and the currency of the 6th of May 1844 have not yet
been fulfilled. "I rejoice," he said, "on public grounds, in the hope that
the wisdom of parliament will at length devise measures which shall inspire
just confidence in the medium of exchange, shall put a check on improvident
speculations, and shall ensure the just reward of industry and the
legitimate profit of commercial enterprise conducted with integrity and
controlled by provident calculation."

The extreme measures which have been required since the act af 1844 point
out for themselves the necessity for reform. Three times since the date of
the Bank Act of 1844 it has been needful to give permission for the
suspension of that act which forms the very foundation of the monetary
system of Great Britain. This, whenever it has occurred, has exercised a
very injurious effect on credit abroad, as well as on prosperity at home.

The British money-market, the clearing-house of the world, is, in
consequence of the smallness of its reserve, exposed to greater
fluctuations than that of any other country. These fluctuations may arise
from the need of meeting the requirements of other countries for specie or
those arising from domestic trade. The recorded excess of imports over
exports, £147,000,000 in 1906, though the difference is eventually balanced
by the "invisible" exports, gives foreign nations at times a power over the
British money-market greater than has ever previously been the case. The
current must always have a tendency to flow outwards; this is enhanced by
the great increase in the number of foreign banks which have branches in
England. The need of providing sufficient reserves to meet requirements
thus occasioned is obvious.

[Sidenote: British banking abroad.]

As regards the banks in which British interests are concerned in British
colonies and other countries we can only speak briefly. It must not be
overlooked that in the Dominion of Canada there are 29 banks, many of them
large, managed much on the Scottish principle with capitals of nearly
£19,000,000 and deposits of about £140,000,000. These banks have more than
1200 offices. In Australia and New Zealand there are 24 banks with capitals
of nearly £18,000,000 and deposits of about £130,000,000. The number of
offices is nearly 1700. There are, including the three Presidency banks,
about 15 banks doing business mainly in India--in some cases connecting
neighbouring countries and places like Bangkok, Hong-Kong and Zanzibar.
These banks have capitals of more than £5,000,000 and deposits of fully
£36,000,000 and over 210 offices. There are at least 8 banks in South and
West Africa with capitals of nearly £5,000,000, deposits of nearly
£50,000,000 and nearly 370 offices. There are 5 banks, including the
Colonial Bank, in other British territories with capitals of about
£1,000,000 and deposits of £3,300,000, and about 25 offices. There are
thus, besides many private firms doing very considerable business, more
than 80 joint-stock British banks working in the colonies with capitals
amounting to £48,000,000, deposits £360,000,000 and offices 3505. Outside
British territories there are 6 banks, principally in South America, with
nearly £4,000,000 capital, £36,000,000 deposits and about 60 offices. There
are 6 large banks doing business principally in the East with more than
£6,700,000 capitals, £77,000,000 deposits and 106 offices: and 7 other
banks, including Barings, with about £4,500,000 capitals and £22,000,000
deposits There are thus about 20 British banks doing business in foreign
countries with capitals amounting to £15,200,000, deposits £135,000,000 and
offices 173.

In this statement we have included only the more important banks, which
collectively wield about £63,000,000 capital and more than £495,000,000
deposits--in all about £560,000,000 of resources operating at about 3700
offices situated in places as different from each other and as widely
separated as California and Hong-Kong, Constantinople and New Zealand.

_France_.--In France the first bank of issue, originally called the _Banque
Générale_, was established in 1716 by John Law, the author of the
_Mississippi Scheme_ and the _Système_. Law's bank, which had been
converted into the _Banque Royale_ in 1718, and its notes guaranteed by the
king (Louis XV.), came to an end in 1721; an attempt at reconstruction was
made in 1767, but the bank thus established was suppressed in 1793. Other
banks, some issuing notes, then carried on operations with limited success,
but these never attained any real power. There were many negotiations on
the subject of the establishment of a bank in 1796. The financial
difficulties of the times prevented any immediate result, but the advice of
those engaged in this plan was of great assistance to Napoleon I., who,
aided by his minister Mollien, founded in 1800 the Bank of France, which
has remained from that time to the present by far the most powerful
financial institution in the country. The objects for which it was
established were to support the trade and industry of France and to supply
the use of loanable capital at a moderate charge. These functions it has
exercised ever since with great vigour and great judgment, extending itself
through its branches and towns attached to branches over the whole country.
At its establishment and for some time subsequently the operations of the
bank did not extend over the whole of France. Departmental banks with the
privilege of issue had been formed under a law adopted in 1803. At the
close of 1847 there were nine of these banks existing in as many of the
larger towns. In 1848, however, they were absorbed into the Bank of France,
which has since possessed an exclusive privilege of issue, and in 1863 took
over the Bank of Savoy after that province was united to France.

The Bank of France has successfully surmounted many political as well as
financial troubles both during and since the times of Napoleon I. The
overthrow of the government of Louis Philippe in 1848, the war with Germany
in 1870, the many difficulties that followed when the Commune reigned in
Paris in 1871, the payment of the war indemnity--not completed till
1873--were all happily overcome. Great pains, too, have been taken,
especially of recent years, to render services to large and small
businesses and to agricultural industry. In 1877 the offices of the Bank of
France were 78 in number; in 1906 they were 447, including the towns
"connected with the branches"--an arrangement which, without putting the
bank to the expense of opening a branch, gives the place connected many of
the advantages which a branch confers. The quantity of commercial paper
discounted is very large. More than 20,000,000 bills were discounted in
1906, the total amount being £559,234,996. The advances on securities were
in the same year £106,280,124. The rate of discount in Paris is as a rule
lower and the number of alterations fewer than in London. From May 1900 to
January 1906 there was no change, the rate remaining uniformly at 3%. Bills
as low as 4s. 2d. are admitted to discount, including those below 8s.;
about 232,000 of this class were discounted in 1906. Since the 27th of
March 1890 loans of as small an amount as £10 are granted. In most cases
three "names" must be furnished for each bill, or suitable guarantees or
security given, but these necessary safeguards have not to be furnished in
such a manner as to hamper applicants for loans unduly. In this manner the
Bank of France is of great service to the industry of the country. It has
never succeeded, however, in attracting deposits on anything like the scale
of the Bank of England or the banks of the English-speaking peoples, but it
held, as stated in the balance-sheet for the 23rd of December 1906, about
£35,000,000 in deposits, of which £14,000,000 was on account of the
treasury and £21,000,000 for individuals, and the amount held in this
manner gradually increases. The report for 1904 says "each year the
movement in these increases, and this economical and safe mode of effecting
receipts and payments is more and more appreciated by the public." In one
respect the Bank of France stands at a great advantage in connexion with
this branch of its business. The average amount held in this manner for
individuals during 1906 was about £23,000,000. As the accounts numbered
77,159 the average for each account was comparatively small. Accounts so
subdivided give a great probability of permanence. The figures of the
accounts for 1904 were as follows:--

        11,178 current accounts, with power of discount.
         4,576 simple current accounts.
        26,709 current accounts, with advances.
        24,106 accounts, deposits.

  Total 66,569 accounts, against 59,182 at the end of 1903.

At the present time the Bank of France operates chiefly through its
enormous note circulation (averaging in 1906 £186,300,000), by means of
which most business transactions in France are carried on.

The limits of the circulation of the Bank of France and the dates when it
has been extended are as follows:--

  +--------------------------+-------------+-------------------+
  |      Dates               | Millions of |  Converting the   |
  |                          |   Francs    | Franc as 25 = £1. |
  +--------------------------+-------------+-------------------+
  | 15th March 1848          |     350     |     £14,000,000   |
  | 27th April, 2nd May 1848 |     452     |      18,000,000   |
  | 2nd December 1849        |     525     |      21,000,000   |
  | 12th August 1870         |    1800     |      32,000,000   |
  | 14th August 1870         |    2400     |      96,000,000   |
  | 29th December 1871       |    2800     |     112,000,000   |
  | 15th July 1872           |    3200     |     128,000,000   |
  | 30th January 1884        |    3500     |     140,000,000   |
  | 25th January 1893        |    4000     |     160,000,000   |
  | 17th December 1897       |    5000     |     200,000,000   |
  |   In 1906                |    5800     |     232,000,000   |
  +--------------------------+-------------+-------------------+

[v.03 p.0343] Most business transactions in France are liquidated, not in
cheques as in England, but in notes of the Bank of France. These, owing to
their convenience, are preferred to specie. This is accumulated in the
vaults of the Bank of France, which in 1906 held on average £115,000,000
gold and £42,000,000 silver. The gold held by the Bank of France is
generally considerably larger in amount than that held by the Bank of
England, which in the autumn of 1890 had to borrow £3,000,000 in gold from
the Bank of France at the time of the Baring crisis. The large specie
reserve of the bank has given stability to the trade of France, and has
enabled the bank to manage its business without the numerous fluctuations
in the rate of discount which are constantly occurring in England. It is
true that the holding this very large amount of specie imposes a very heavy
burden on the shoulders of the shareholders of the bank, but they do not
complain. The advantage to business from the low rate of interest which has
to be paid for the use of borrowed capital in France is a great advantage
to the trade and industry of that country.

The mass of the reserve in France is so great that the movements of the
precious metals, when they are the result only of natural causes, are
allowed to go on without corresponding movements in the discount rate. But
it must be remembered that this large reserve is held in part against a
gigantic note issue, and also that the trade activity and enterprise of the
French people are less intense than in either the United Kingdom or
Germany; thus it is much easier for the Bank of France to maintain a steady
rate of discount.

Besides the Bank of France, several great credit institutions carry on
business in the country; as the _Banque de Paris et des Pays-Bas_ (capital
and reserve, £3,729,000; other liabilities, deposits, &c., £14,842,000),
the _Banque Française pour le Commerce et l'Industrie_ (£2,450,000; and
£3,505,000), the _Crédit Lyonnais_ (£14,000,000; and £82,570,000), the
_Comptoir National d'Escompte de Paris_ (£6,772,000; and £47,593,000), the
_Société Générale pour favoriser le développement du Commerce et de
l'Industrie en France_ (£7,469,000; and £45,800,000), and the _Société
Générale de Crédit Industriel et Commercial_ (£1,600,000; and £10,060,000).

There is also the _Crédit Foncier de France_ with a very considerable
capital, but the business done is so largely that of mortgages that it can
hardly be included among banks, though it carries on in some measure the
business of banking.

Besides the six important joint-stock banks mentioned above, there exists
in France a large number of banks, principally in the provinces, carrying
on a very considerable business. Little is known as to their deposits, but
their business appears to be conducted with great prudence and discretion.
One hundred and eighty-two of these firms were members of the French
Country Bankers' Association in 1898. They carry on business in 66 out of
the 86 departments into which France is divided. More than one of these
banks has several offices--one possessing 18, including the head office.
These branches are situated in the small towns in the vicinity. In this the
business follows more the English method of small branches. The French
Country Bankers' Association holds its meetings in Paris, where matters of
interest to bankers are discussed. (See _Bankers' Magazine_, July 1898.)

_Germany_.--Besides the Imperial Bank of Germany, the "Reichsbank," there
are about 140 banks doing business in the states which form the German
empire. These credit and industrial banks with their large resources have
had an immense influence in bringing about the astonishing industrial
development of their country. Five banks possess the right of uncovered
note-issue; these are:--

  The Imperial Bank of Germany with right of issue £23,641,450
  The Bank of Saxony          "       "       "        838,500
  The Bank of Bavaria         "       "       "      1,600,000
  The Bank of Württemberg     "       "       "        500,000
  The Bank of Baden           "       "       "        500,000
                                                   -----------
                                                   £27,079,950

At the Bank of Germany the coin and bullion held is sometimes larger than
at the Bank of England. The statement of the specie in the weekly accounts
includes silver. The amounts held in gold and silver are only separated
once a year, when the balance-sheet is published. The figures of the
balance-sheet for the 31st of December 1906 showed in round numbers
£24,000,000 gold and £9,000,000 silver. As far as the capital is concerned
the £18,000,000 of the Bank of England considerably exceeds the £9,000,000
of the Bank of France and the £12,200,000 of the Bank of Germany. The note
circulation of both the other banks is considerably larger than that of the
Bank of England, that of the Bank of France being £186,300,000, and of the
Imperial Bank of Germany £69,000,000 in 1906.

The capitals and reserves of the German banks, including those of banks
established to do business in other countries, as South America and the Far
East, and of the Bank of Germany, are about £133,000,000, with further
resources, including deposits, notes and mortgage bonds, amounting to fully
£414,000,000. The amount of the capital compares very closely with that of
the capitals of the banks of the United Kingdom. The deposits are
increasing. The deposits, however, are not the whole of the resources of
the German banks. The banks make use, besides, of their acceptances in a
manner which is not practised by the banks of other countries, and the
average note circulation of the Reichsbank, included in the statement given
above, is between £60,000,000 and £70,000,000.

A large and apparently increasing proportion of the resources of the German
banks is employed in industrial concerns, some of which are beyond the
boundaries of the empire. The dangers of this practice have called forth
many criticisms in Germany, among which may be quoted the remarks of Caesar
Strauss and of Dr R. Koch, the president of the Reichsbank. Dr Koch
especially points out the need of the development of powerful banks in
Germany unconnected with speculative business of this kind. The object of
employing their funds thus is the higher rate of interest to be obtained
from these investments than from discounting bills or making loans at home.
But such an employment of the resources of a bank is opposed to all regular
rules of business and of banking tradition, which abstains from making
fixed investments of any large part of the resources of a bank. On the
other hand, Dr Koch observes that the risks of the one "reserve system"
mentioned by Bagehot are not to be feared in Germany.[5] The recent
movement in favour of concentration among the banks has been described by
Dr E. Depitre and Dr Riesser, who give particulars of the business done by
these banks, which does not correspond with banking as practised in the
United Kingdom, being more of an industrial character.

There are also many private banking firms in Germany which do a
considerable amount of business.

The Reichsbank, by far the most powerful banking institution in Germany, is
managed by the bank directory appointed by the chancellor of the empire.
The shareholders join in the management through a committee, of which each
member must be qualified by holding not less than three shares. The
government exercises complete powers of control through the chancellor of
the empire. The influence of the Imperial Bank now permeates, by means of
its branches, all the separate kingdoms of the empire--the uniformity of
coinage introduced through the laws of 1871-1873 rendering this possible.
The Imperial Bank assists business principally in two ways--first, through
the clearing system (_Giro-Verkehr_), which it has greatly developed, and
secondly, through the facilities given to business by its note circulation.
The Imperial Bank also receives deposits, and cheques are drawn against
these, but in Germany notes are principally used in payments for ordinary
business.

Before the Reichsbank was established, Hamburg was the first, and for a
long time the only, example of a clearing in Germany. This was taken up by
the Reichsbank when it established its office in Hamburg in the
time-honoured building which had belonged to the Hamburg Clearing House.
Similar business had long been undertaken by the Bank of Prussia. This was
absorbed and developed by the Reichsbank in 1876. Through the "clearing
system" money can be remitted from any of the 443 places in which there is
an office of the Reichsbank, to any of these places, without charge either
to the sender or the receiver. It is sufficient that the person to whom the
money is to be remitted should have an account at the bank. Any person
owing him money in the remotest parts of the empire may go to the office of
the bank which is most convenient to him and pay in the amount of his debt,
which is credited on the following day at the office of the bank, without
charge, to the account of his creditor wherever he may reside. The person
who makes the payment need not have any account with the bank. The impetus
given to business by this arrangement has been very considerable. It
practically amounts to a money-order system without charge or risk of loss
in transmission. From Hamburg and Bremen to the frontiers of Russia, from
the shores of the Baltic to the frontiers of Switzerland, the whole of the
empire of Germany has thus become for monetary purposes one country only.
The amount of these transfers for the year 1906 exceeded £1,860,000,000.

The note circulation is also a powerful factor of the business of the
Reichsbank. It is governed by the law of 1875 and the amending law of 1899,
corresponding in some degree to Peel's act of 1844, which regulates the
note circulation of the Bank of England. An uncovered limit, originally
£12,500,000, increased to £14,811,450 by the lapse of the issues of other
banks allowed to it, has been extended by these and by the act of the 5th
of June 1902 to £23,641,450. Against the notes thus issued which are not
represented by specie, treasury notes (_Reichskassenscheine_, the legal
tender notes of the [v.03 p.0344] empire)[6] and notes of the issuing banks
which are allowed to be reckoned as specie or discounted bills, must be
held--maturing not later than three months after being taken--with, as a
rule, three, but never less than two, good indorsements. There is also a
provision that at least one-third of the notes in circulation must be
covered by current German notes, money, notes of the imperial treasury, and
gold in bullion or foreign coin reckoned at £69, 12s. per pound fine. The
Reichsbank is bound by law to redeem its notes in current German money. It
is stated that this may be gold coin or silver thalers, or bar-gold at the
rate of 1392 marks (£69, 12s. reckoning marks as 20 = £1) the pound fine of
gold. In practice, however, facilities have not always been given by the
Reichsbank for the payment of its obligations in gold, though the
importance of this is admitted. In the balance-sheet for 1906 the bills
held amounted to £67,000,000, and the loans and advances to £14,200,000.
The notes issued averaged for the year £69,000,000. The gold held amounted,
30th December 1906, to £24,069,000. If the condition of business requires
that the notes in circulation should exceed the limits allowed by the law,
the bank is permitted to do this on the payment of 5% on the surplus. In
this respect the German act differs from the English act, which allows no
such automatic statutory power of overpassing the limit of issue. Some good
authorities consider that this arrangement is an advantage for the German
bank, and the fact that it has been made use of annually since 1895 appears
to show that it is needed by the business requirements of the country. Of
late years the excess of issue of the Reichsbank has been annual and large,
having been £25,267,000 on the 29th of September 1906 and £28,632,000 on
the 31st of December of the same year. The amount of the duty paid on the
excess issue in the year 1906 was £184,764, and the total amount paid thus
from 1876 to 1906 was £839,052. The increase of the uncovered limit
(untaxed limit of issue called in Germany the "note reserve") has not been
sufficient to obviate the need for an excess of issue beyond the limit.

In accordance with a law passed in 1906 the Imperial Bank issues notes
(_Reichsbanknoten_) of the value of 20 marks (£1), and 50 marks (£2, 10s.)
in addition to the 5, 10, 100 and 1000 mark notes (5s., 10s., £5, £50)
previously in circulation. Imperial paper currency of the value of 20 or 50
marks (£1 and £2, 10s.) had previously existed only in the form of treasury
notes (_Reichskassenscheine_); these will in consequence be withdrawn from
circulation.

The amendment of the banking law of Germany, passed in 1899, not only
affects the position of the Reichsbank, but that of the four other
note-issuing banks. The capital of the Reichsbank has been raised by the
bill of that year to £9,000,000. The reserve fund has been raised out of
surplus profits to £3,240,000. This exceeds the amount required by the act
of 1899, which was £3,000,000. The amending act further diminishes the
dividend receivable by the stockholders of the Reichsbank and increases the
share which the government will obtain.

The arrangement with the four note-issuing banks is designed to cause them
to work in harmony with the Reichsbank when the Reichsbank has to raise its
bank-rate in order to protect its gold reserves. The official published
rate of discount of the Reichsbank is to be binding on the private
note-issuing banks after it has reached or when it reaches 4%. At other
times they are not to discount at more than ¼% below the official rate of
the Reichsbank, or in case the Reichsbank itself discounts at a lower rate
than the official rate, at more than 1/8% below that rate. If the
Reichsbank discounts below the official rate, it is to announce that fact
in the _Gazette_.

The subject being important, we quote from the amending act the sections
governing the discount rate:--_Gesetz, betreffend die Abänderung des
Bankgesetzes vom 14. März 1875; vom 7. Juni 1899, Artikel 7, S. 1_. The
private note-issuing banks are bound by _Artikel 7, S. 2_, after the 1st of
January 1901:--"(1) Not to discount below the rate published in S. 15 of
the bank law, so long as this rate attains or exceeds 4%, and (2) moreover,
not to discount at more than ¼% below the Reichsbank rate, published in S.
15 of the bank law, or in case the Reichsbank itself discounts at a lower
rate, not to discount at more than 1/8% below that rate."

It remains to be seen whether the note-issuing banks will find these
conditions too onerous, and rather than be bound by them will give up their
right of issuing notes. The object of the enactment is apparently to
protect the specie reserve of the Reichsbank, but it may be doubted
whether, considering the importance of the other banks of Germany--none of
which is bound by similar conditions--relatively to the note-issuing banks,
the restrictions put on the note-issuing banks will have any practical
effect.

Since 1870 banking has made immense progress in Germany, but it may be some
time before the habit of making payments by cheque instead of specie or
notes becomes general.

AUTHORITIES.--_Parliamentary Papers: Report, together with Minutes of
Evidence and Accounts, from the Select Committee on the High Price of Gold
Bullion_, House of Commons, 8th of June 1810; _Reports, Committee of
Secrecy on Bank of England Charter_, House of Commons, 1832; _Select
Committee on Banks of Issue_, House of Commons, 1840; _First and Second
Reports, Select Committee on Banks of Issue_, House of Commons, 1841;
_First and Second Reports, Secret Committee on Commercial Distress_, House
of Commons, 1848; _Report, Select Committee on Bank Acts_, House of
Commons, 1857; _Report, Select Committee on Bank Acts_, House of Commons,
1858; _Report, Select Committee on Banks of Issue_, House of Commons, 1875;
_Report from Secret Committee of the House of Lords on the Causes of the
Distress which has for some time prevailed among the Commercial Classes,
and how far it had been affected by the Laws for regulating the Issue of
Bank Notes payable on demand_, session 1847-1848; _Analysis of the Minutes
of Evidence taken before the Select Committee of the House of Commons on
Banks of Issue, 1875, with a selection from the evidence_, by R. H. Inglis
Palgrave, London, 1876 (printed for private circulation).

GENERAL INFORMATION.--Articles on banking, &c., _Dictionary of Political
Economy_, edited by R. H. Inglis Palgrave (Macmillan & Co., 1894-1906);
_Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften_, edited by Conrad, Elster, Lexis
and Löning, 1899; _Wörterbuch der Volkswirthschaft_, 2 vols. (ed. Elster,
1898); _Dictionnaire des finances_, edited under the direction of Léon Say,
by L. Foyot and A. Lanjalley (1889); _Dictionnaire du commerce, de
l'industrie et de la banque_, edited by A. Raffalovich and Yves Guyot;
_Bankers' Magazine_, commenced 1844, to present time; _Journal of the
Institute of Bankers_, commenced 1879, to present time; _Bankers' Magazine_
(New York); _Economist_ newspaper, commenced 1843, to present time;
_Banking Almanac_, commenced 1845, to present time; _Reports of the
Comptroller of the Currency_ (Washington).

EARLY.--_De Monetarum Augmento, variatione et diminutione, Tractatus varii_
(1509); _A proposal to supply His Majesty with twelve or fourteen Millions
of Money (or more if requir'd)_, by A. D. of Grey's Inn, Esq., and some
Others, his Friends (1697); Hayes' _Negociators' Magazine of Monies and
Exchanges_, 1730; Lord King, _Thoughts on Bank Restrictions_ (1804); _The
Theory of Money with considerations on the Bank of England_ (1811); William
Cobbett, _Paper against Gold and Glory against Prosperity_, 2 vols. (1815);
_Circulating Credit with Hints for improving the Banking System of Britain,
by a Scottish Banker_ (1832); W. Leckie, _Bank Restriction_ (1841);
_Debates in the House of Commons on Sir R. Peel's Bank Bills of 1844 and
1845_, reprinted verbatim from "Hansard's Parliamentary Debates," 1875;
_Gilbart's Works_, 6 vols. (1865); _The History, Principles and Practice of
Banking_, by J. W. Gilbart, edited and revised by A. S. Michie, 1882;
Thomson Hankey, _Principles of Banking_ (1867); Walter Bagehot, _Lombard
Street_ (1873), a brilliant picture of the city at that date (new ed.,
1906); A. S. Cobb, _Threadneedle Street, a reply to "Lombard Street"_
(1891); John Dun, _British Banking Statistics_ (1876); R. H. Inglis
Palgrave, _Notes on Banking_; George Rae, _The Country Banker_ (1886), and
several editions later (many sound hints on practice); J. George Kiddy,
_The Country Banker's Handbook_, 4th ed. (1903); C. F. Dunbar, _Chapters on
the Theory and History of Banking_ (1891); Charles Gairdner, _The Making of
the Gold Reserves_ (1891); J. B. Attfield, _English and Foreign Banks_
(1893) (refers to management of banks); T. B. Moxon, _English Practical
Banking_, 10th ed. (1899); A. Crump, _The Key to the London Money Market_
(1872); W. Y. Duncan, _Notes on the Rate of Discount in London_, 3 vols.,
1822-1856, 1856-1866, 1866-1873, privately printed, Edinburgh, 1856, 1867
and 1877; R. H. Inglis Palgrave, _Bank Rate and the Money Market in
England, France, Germany, Holland and Belgium_, 1844-1900 (1903); Ernest
Seyd, _The Bank of England Note Issue and its Error_ (1874); Ernest Seyd,
_London Banking and Bankers' Clearing House System_; Ernest Seyd, _The
Silver Question in 1893_; Walter Bagehot, _Depreciation of Silver_ (1877);
Ernest Seyd, _Bullion and the Foreign Exchanges_ (1868); Clare, _The A B C
of the Foreign Exchanges_ (1895, 2nd ed. 1895); _Tracts_, by Lord Overstone
(1837-1857); _Select Tracts on Money, &c._, reprinted privately by Lord
Overstone, 1856-1859 (containing much valuable and interesting information
on early history); A. Crump, _A Practical Treatise on Banking, Currency and
the Exchanges_ (1866); Bonamy Price, _Currency and Banking_ (1876) (the
interest of this volume to the student of banking is found mainly in the
correspondence between Mr Henry Hucks Gibbs (Lord Aldenham) and Professor
Bonamy Price on the reserve of the Bank of England); R. H. Inglis Palgrave,
_On the Influence of a Note Circulation in the Conduct of Banking
Business_, read before the Manchester Statistical Society, 1877; Edgar
Jaffé, _Das englische Bankwesen_ (Leipzig, 1905); _A History of Banks_
(1837); D. Hardcastle, _Banks and Bankers_ (1843); W. J. Lawson, _The
History of Banking_ (1850); R. Baxter, _The Panic of 1866_ (1866); F. G. H.
Price, _A Handbook of London Bankers_ (1876); Conant, _History of Modern
Banks of Issue_ (New York, 1896); _History of Banking in all Leading
Nations_, 4 vols. (New York, 1896); Viscount Goschen, _Essays and Addresses
on Economic Questions, 1865-1893_ (1905), (arts. on "Seven per cent," "Two
per cent," "Our cash reserves and central stock of gold"); C. F. Dunbar,
_Economic Essays_, edited by O. M. W. Sprague (1904), (containing many
articles on banking, particularly in the United States).

BANK OF ENGLAND.--T. Fortune, _A Concise and Authentic History of the Bank
of England_ (1802); John Francis, _History of the Bank of England_ (1847);
J. E. Thorold Rogers, _The First Nine Years of [v.03 p.0345] the Bank of
England_ (1887); B. B. Turner, _Chronicles of the Bank of England_ (1897);
T. A. Stephens, _Bibliography of the Bank of England_ (1897); A. Andréadès,
_Histoire de la banque d'Angleterre_ (1904; Eng. trans., 1909); Sir F.
Schuster, _The Bank of England and the State_ (1906).

HISTORY OF BANKING HOUSES.--L. H. Grindon, _Manchester Banks and Bankers_
(1877); J. B. Martin, _"The Grasshopper" in Lombard Street_ (1892); M.
Phillips, _Banks, Bankers, and Banking in Northumberland, Durham and North
Yorkshire_ (1894); C. H. Cave, _History of Banking in Bristol_ (1899);
Bidwell, _Annals of an East Anglian Bank_ (1900); Richardson, _Coutts &
Co., Bankers, Edinburgh and London_; H. T. Easton, _History of a Banking
House_ (Smith, Payne & Smiths) (1903); J. Hughes, _Liverpool Banks and
Bankers, 1760-1837_ (1906).

SCOTLAND.--W. H. Logan, _The Scottish Banker_ (1847); Robert Somers, _The
Scotch Banks and System of Issue_ (1873); W. Mitchell, _Scotch Banks and
Limited Liability_ (1879); A. W. Kerr, _History of Scotch Banking_ (1884);
A. W. Kerr, _Scottish Banking, 1865-1896_ (1898); Boase, _A Century of
Banking in Dundee_ (1867).

IRELAND.--Malcolm Dillon, _History and Development of Banking in Ireland_
(1889).

BRITISH COLONIES.--Edward B. Hamilton, _A Manual of the Law and Practice of
Banking in Australia and New Zealand_ (1880); _Banking in Australasia_
(1883); _The Canadian System of Banking and the National Banking System of
the United States_ (Toronto, 1890); _Journal of the Canadian Bankers'
Association_ (Montreal).

FRANCE.--Annuaire-Chaix, _Les Principales Sociétés par actions_ (1905); A.
Raffalovich, _Le Marché financier_ (1905).

GERMANY.--Dr W. Scharling, _Bank Politik_ (Jena, 1900); _Die Reichsbank,
1876-1900_ (a history and description of the operations of the bank); Dr
Adolf Weber, _Depositenbanken und Spekulationsbanken, Ein Vergleich
deutschen und englischen Bankwesens_ (Leipzig, 1902); Dr Felix Hecht, _Die
Mannheimer Banken, 1870 bis 1900_ (Leipzig, 1902); Siegfried Buff, _Das
Kontokurrentgeschaft im deutschen Bankwerbe_ (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1904);
Dr Riesser, _Zur Entwicklungsgeschichte der deutschen Grossbanken mit
besonderer Rucksicht auf die Konzentrationsbestrebungen_ (1905); G. M.
Boissevain, _Duitsche en Engelsche Deposito-Banken_ (1905).

ITALY.--_La Banca Popolare di Milano_ (1881).

AUSTRIA.--Compass, _Finanzielles Jahrbuch für Österreich-Ungarn_ (Vienna).

JAPAN.--_The House of Mitsui_ (Tokio); _The Law and the By-Laws of the
Nippon Kogyo Ginko (The Industrial Bank of Japan)_ (1903).

H. W. Wolff, _People's Banks_ (1893). (On systems worked by
Schulze-Delitzsch, Raiffeisen, Luzzatti, Banche Popolari, Dr Wollemborg,
Popular Banks in Belgium, Switzerland, France, England).

(R. H. I. P.)

UNITED STATES

The early history of the American colonies is strewn, like that of most new
countries, with many crude experiments in banking and currency issues. Most
of these colonial enterprises, however, were projects for the issue of
paper money rather than the creation of commercial banks. Speculative
banking was checked to a large extent in the colonies by the Bubble Act (6
Geo. I. c. 18), which was passed in England after the bursting of the South
Sea Bubble. This act, which forbade the formation of banking companies
without a special charter, was in 1740 extended to the colonies.

The serious history of banking in the United States may be said to have
begun with the foundation of the Bank of Pennsylvania. This bank originated
in the project of a number of the citizens of Philadelphia to supply the
continental army with rations. The first bills, issued in 1780, were
nothing more than interest-bearing notes payable at a future time. The
advances in continental money made by the shareholders were secured by
bills of exchange for £150,000, drawn on the American envoys in Europe, but
not intended to be negotiated.

A further outgrowth of the needs of the continental government was the Bank
of North America, which was authorized by congress on May 26, 1781. The act
gave to Robert Morris, the financier, power to create a bank with a capital
of $400,000, to be increased if desirable. Morris arranged with the Bank of
Pennsylvania to take over its holdings of foreign bills and paid in cash
its claims against the Federation. The Bank of North America did not begin
business until the 7th of January 1782, and there was so much doubt of the
power of the continental congress to charter a bank that it was thought
advisable to obtain a charter from the state of Pennsylvania. Under this
charter the bank continued to operate until it was absorbed in the national
banking system in 1863, and it may be considered the oldest organized
banking institution in the United States.

The bank did much, during the first eight years after its organization, to
restore order to the chaos of Federation finances. It loaned to Morris, as
government superintendent of finance, $1,249,975, of which $996,581 was
repaid in cash and the remainder by surrendering the stock in the bank
owned by the government.

_The Bank of the United States._--A national bank of issue was one of the
essential parts of the system built up by Alexander Hamilton in organizing
the finances of the Federal government under the constitution of 1789. The
first "Bank of the United States" was accordingly incorporated in 1791,
with a capital of $10,000,000, divided into 25,000 shares of $400 each.
This bank issued circulating notes, discounted commercial paper and aided
the government in its financial operations. The government subscribed
one-fifth of the capital, but paid for it by a roundabout process which
actually resulted in the loan of the amount by the bank to the treasury.
Other loans were made by the bank to the government, which gradually
carried the obligation by the end of 1795 to $6,200,000. In order to meet
these obligations, the government gradually disposed of its bank stock,
until by 1802 its entire holdings had been disposed of at a profit of
$671,860. The bank did not publish regular reports, but a statement
submitted by Gallatin to congress for January 24, 1811, showed resources of
$24,183,046, of which $14,578,294 was in loans and discounts, $2,750,000 in
United States stock and $5,009,567 in specie.

The expiration of the charter of the bank in 1811 was the occasion of a
party contest, which prevented renewal and added greatly to the financial
difficulties of the government in the war with Great Britain which began in
the next year. Although foreign shareholders were not permitted to vote by
proxy, and the twenty-five directors were required to be citizens of the
United States, the bank was attacked on the ground of foreign ownership as
well as on the constitutional ground that congress had no power to create
such an institution.

The government was compelled in the war of 1812 to rely on the state banks.
Their suspension of specie payments, in 1814, made it very difficult for
the treasury to transfer funds from one part of the Union to the other,
because the notes of one section did not circulate readily in another.
Gallatin left on record the opinion that the suspension of specie payments
"might have been prevented at the time when it took place, had the former
Bank of the United States been still in existence."

The financial condition of the government became so bad during the war that
the second Bank of the United States was authorized in April 1816. The
general project was that of Alexander J. Dallas, who in October 1814 had
become secretary of the treasury. The capital of the new bank was
$35,000,000, and the government again appeared as owner of one-fifth of the
stock, which was paid in a stock note. The president of the United States
was authorized to appoint five of the twenty-five directors and public
funds were to be deposited in the bank, "unless the secretary of the
treasury shall at any time otherwise order and direct." The right of
congress to charter the bank came before the Supreme Court in 1819 in the
famous case of _McCulloch_ v. _Maryland_. Chief Justice Marshall rendered
the decision that the right to create the bank was within the implied
powers granted by the Federal constitution, and that it was not competent
for the states to levy taxes upon the circulating notes of the bank or upon
its property except in common with other property.

The second Bank of the United States was not well managed in the early part
of its career, but was upon a firmer foundation under the presidency of
Langdon Cheves in 1819. Its policy greatly benefited commerce, but invited
bitter complaints from the private dealers in exchange, who had been
enabled to make excessive profits while the currency was below par, because
of its different values in different states and the constant fluctuations
in these values. The Bank, in the language of the report of Senator Samuel
Smith of Maryland in 1832, furnished "a currency as safe as silver, more
convenient, and more valuable [v.03 p.0346] than silver, which through the
whole western and southern and interior parts of the Union, is eagerly
sought in exchange for silver; which, in those sections, often bears a
premium paid in silver; which is, throughout the Union, equal to silver, in
payment to the government, and payments to individuals in business."

The bank in 1835 had attained a circulation of $23,075,422; loans of
$59,232,445; and deposits of $5,061,456. The institution was ultimately
destroyed by the open enmity of President Jackson, who in 1833 had
suspended the deposit of public money in its custody. This policy known as
the "removal of the deposits," excited a bitter political controversy in
which Clay and Webster led the opposition, but Jackson was supported by the
public (see JACKSON, ANDREW). The Federal charter of the bank expired in
1836. Under a charter obtained by President Nicholas Biddle from the state
of Pennsylvania, the bank continued its business, but without success, and
in 1841 it went into liquidation.

_The State Banks_.--The Bank of the United States found powerful rivals
during its life and successors after its death in the banks chartered by
the separate states. In the undeveloped state of the country in the early
days there was much unsound and speculative banking. The most successful
systems were those of New York and New England, where the surplus capital
of the country in the early days was chiefly concentrated. The least
successful banking systems were those in the newer and poorer sections of
the country, and they grew progressively worse as poverty and inexperience
added to the difficulty of setting aside capital for investment in the
tools of exchange.

The termination of the first charter of the Bank of the United States was
followed by a banking mania. In Pennsylvania a bill authorizing 41 new
banks was passed over the veto of the governor, and 37 of them were in
operation in 1814. Similar movements in other states increased the number
of banks in four years (1811-1815) from 88 to 208. The amount of specie was
not adequate to support the mass of credit which these banks created, and
what there was in the country drifted to New England, which was upon a
metallic basis. A number of banks collapsed in 1814, and business
prostration was prolonged for several years.

The banking laws of the states varied considerably. Some states authorized
the issue of notes upon state bonds, many of which, especially at the
outbreak of the Civil War, proved valueless. In New England, however, a
system prevailed which required the prompt redemption of the banks' notes
at par. The New England Bank was the pioneer of this movement in 1814. In
1824 what was known as the "Suffolk system" of redemption came into
operation. This system provided for the deposit by a bank in the Suffolk
Bank in Boston of a redemption fund, from which the notes were redeemed and
afterwards sent home by the Suffolk Bank for collection. This system, with
slight modifications, continued in successful operation until 1858. The
circulation of the New England banks in 1858 was less than $40,000,000 and
the redemptions in the course of the year through the Suffolk Bank were
$400,000,000. It was the essential merit claimed for the system that it
tended to keep the volume of the circulation constantly adjusted to the
requirements of business. A branch redemption agency was established at
Providence. Legal sanction was given to the system in Vermont by an act of
1842, which levied a tax of 1% upon bank capital, but remitted this tax to
any bank which should "keep a sufficient deposit of funds in the city of
Boston, and should at that city uniformly cause its bills to be redeemed at
par."

The period from 1836 to 1842 was a trying one for American banking. It was
preceded by another great expansion in financial ventures, made without
sufficient circulating capital or adherence to conservative banking
methods. Foreign capital had come into the country in considerable amounts
after the English crisis of 1825, the entire debt of the general government
was paid off and a tremendous speculation occurred in public lands, which
were expected to advance rapidly in value as the result of immigration and
the growth of the country. The sales of public lands in 1836, on the eve of
the crisis, reached 20,074,870 acres and brought receipts to the treasury
of $25,167,833. How essentially speculative was the mass of these sales is
indicated by the fact that such receipts declined in 1842 to only
$1,417,972. President Jackson pricked the bubble of speculation by the
"Specie circular" of July 11, 1836, requiring payments for public lands to
be made only in specie or notes of specie value. Practically every bank in
the Union stopped payment, and banking capital fell from $358,442,692 in
1840 to $196,894,309 in 1846. As usual in periods of business collapse the
shrinkage of capital did not follow at once the outbreak of the panic, but
was the result of gradual liquidation. Specie payments were resumed in
1838, but there was another crash in 1842, after the United States Bank
finally suspended.

In New York, which was becoming the chief commercial state of the Union,
the banks of New York City were generally sound, but several different
systems were tried of securing the circulating notes. The "safety-fund
system," inaugurated in 1829, provided for a contribution by each bank
towards a fund to meet the deficit of any contributing bank which might
fail with assets insufficient to meet its liabilities. It was the intention
of the act to protect by this fund only the bank-notes, but it was treated
as a fund for the payment of all the liabilities of a failed bank and in
consequence the fund was exhausted by important failures which occurred in
the panics of 1837 and 1857. Before 1843 the issue of notes was not
controlled by the state, so that in several cases there were illegal
over-issues.

What was called the "free-banking system" was inaugurated in New York by
the act of 1838. This system permitted any body of persons, complying with
the requirements of the law, to form a bank and issue circulation secured
by the deposit of various classes of public bonds. This system was in
operation at the outbreak of the Civil War, was imitated in several other
states, and became in a measure the model of the national banking system.
The state banks of Indiana and Ohio were among the most successful of the
state banks, being modelled somewhat on the European plan of a central
bank. They held in their states an exclusive charter for issuing notes and
had branches at important points throughout the state. Under the management
of Hugh McCulloch, afterwards secretary of the treasury, the bank of
Indiana weathered the crisis of 1857 without suspending specie payments,
and retired its circulation when gold went to a premium in 1862.

One of the defects of the state system of note-issues was the inconvenience
which it occasioned. Notes issued outside a state could not safely be
received without careful scrutiny as to the responsibility of their
issuers. The systems prevailing in New England, in Louisiana, in Ohio and
in Indiana were eminently successful, and proved the soundness of the issue
of bank-notes upon the assets of a well-conducted commercial bank. But the
speculation fostered by loose banking laws in some other states, and the
need for uniformity, cast a certain degree of discredit upon the state
banks, and prepared the way for the acceptance of a uniform banking system
in 1864.

The power of note-issue formed a more important part of banking resources
before the Civil War than in later years, because the deposit system had
not attained its full development. Thus in 1835 circulation and capital of
state banks combined were about $335,000,000 and deposits were only
$83,000,000, in 1907 circulation and capital of national banks
$1,430,000,000, while deposits were $4,322,000,000--in the earlier period
deposits forming less than one-third of the other two items and in the
later period three times the other items. The circulation of the state
banks fluctuated widely at different periods. A maximum of $149,185,890 was
attained in 1837, to decline to $106,968,572 three years later and to a
minimum of $58,563,608 in 1843. From this point there was a tendency
upward, with some variations, which put the circulation in 1845 at
$89,608,711; 1848, $128,506,091; 1850, $131,366,526; 1854, $204,689,207;
1856, $195,747,950; 1858, $155,208,344; 1860, $207,102,477; 1863,
$238,677,218.

Other leading items of the accounts of the state banks for representative
years are as follows:--

[v.03 p.0347]

        _State Banking Progress_, 1835-1863.
  +------+--------+---------------+-------------+-------------+
  |      | No. of |               |  Loans and  |             |
  | Year.| Banks. | Capital Stock.|  Discounts. |  Deposits.  |
  +------+--------+---------------+-------------+-------------+
  | 1835 |   704  |  $231,250,337 |$365,163,834 | $83,081,365 |
  | 1845 |   707  |   206,045,969 | 288,617,131 |  88,020,646 |
  | 1850 |   824  |   217,317,211 | 364,204,078 | 109,586,595 |
  | 1855 |  1307  |   332,177,288 | 576,144,758 | 190,400,342 |
  | 1860 |  1562  |   421,880,095 | 691,945,580 | 253,802,129 |
  | 1863 |  1466  |   405,045,829 | 648,601,863 | 393,686,226 |
  +------+--------+---------------+-------------+-------------+

_The National Banking System._--The creation of the national banking system
was mainly the outcome of the financial necessities of the Federal
government in the Civil War. It was found difficult to float government
bonds at profitable rates, and Mr Chase, the secretary of the treasury,
devised the scheme of creating a compulsory market for the bonds by
offering special privileges to banks organized under Federal charters,
which would issue circulating notes only when secured by the deposit of
government bonds. But this plan, authorized by the act of 25th February
1863 (supplemented by the act of 3rd June 1864), was not sufficient to give
predominance to the national banks. The state banking systems in the older
states were so firmly entrenched in the confidence of the commercial
community that it became necessary to provide for imposing a tax of 10%
upon the face-value of the notes of state banks in circulation after the
1st of July 1866. The state banks were thus driven out of the note-issuing
business, some being converted into national banks, while others continued
their commercial business under state laws without the privilege of
note-issue. A remarkable growth in the national banking system took place;
in 1864 there were 453 national banks with an aggregate capital of
$79,366,950, and in 1865 there were 1014 banks with an aggregate capital of
$242,542,982.

The national banking system was specially marked by the issue of
circulating notes upon United States bonds. Any national bank desiring to
issue notes might by law deposit with the United States treasurer bonds of
the United States to an amount not exceeding its capital stock, and upon
such bonds it might receive circulation equal to 90% of their par-value. No
bank could be established which did not invest one-third of its capital in
bonds. This was changed in 1874 so as to reduce the requirement to 25%,
with a maximum mandatory requirement of $50,000. Notes were taxed at the
rate of 1% per annum. The banks obtained from the provision for circulation
the benefit of what was described by critics as "double interest," being
credited with the interest on bonds in the custody of the treasury
department, and being also able to lend their notes to the public. But
several deductions had to be made: notes could not be issued to the full
par-value of the bonds; the tax of 1% upon circulation reduced by that
amount the profit which would otherwise be earned; and the banks had to set
aside in gold or other lawful money what was needed for redemption purposes
and for reserves. As the banks suspended specie payments at the close of
1861 and great masses of government paper-money were issued, gold ceased to
be a medium of exchange except in California, and the new banks redeemed
their notes in government paper. The gold-value of the bank-notes,
therefore, rose and fell with that of government notes until the resumption
of payments in specie by the national treasury on the 1st of January 1879.

The amount of bank-notes in circulation proved in practice to be influenced
largely by the price of bonds. The maximum originally set for bank
circulation was $300,000,000. This was increased in 1870 by $54,000,000,
and in 1875 the limit was removed. The circulation reached $362,651,169 on
the 1st of January 1883, but afterwards declined materially as bonds became
scarce and the price rose. The fact that circulation could be issued to
only 90% of the par-value of the bonds greatly reduced the net profits on
circulation when the price of 4% bonds rose in 1889 above 129 and other
classes of bonds rose in like ratio. The circulation of bank-notes fell as
low as $167,927,574 on the 1st of July 1891, but afterwards increased
somewhat as the supply of bonds was increased to meet the treasury
deficiencies of 1894-1896 and the expenses of the war with Spain.

The national banks supported the government cordially in the measures taken
to bring about resumption of gold payments on the 1st of January 1879 under
the law of 1875. The banks held more than $125,000,000 in legal tender
notes, of which sum nearly one-third was held in New York City. A run upon
the treasury for the redemption of these notes would have exhausted the
gold funds laboriously accumulated by secretary Sherman and compelled a new
suspension. But the banks appointed a committee to co-operate with the
treasury, declined to receive gold longer as a special deposit, and
resolved to receive and pay balances without discrimination between gold
and government notes. Thus resumption was accomplished without jar, and as
early as the 17th of December 1878 gold sold at par in paper.

The silver legislation enacted by Congress in 1878 and 1890 caused
uneasiness in banking circles, and the banks discriminated against silver
dollars and silver certificates in their cash. When the treasury began to
lose gold heavily, however, in 1893, a combination of leading bankers in
New York, Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore and Chicago turned over a large
part of their holdings to replenish the government reserves. About 150
national banks suspended during the panic of 1893, but 84 of these
afterwards resumed business. As in former periods of depression, the system
suffered the greatest decline during the years of liquidation following the
actual panic, the number of banks falling from 3856 on the 1st of June 1893
to 3585 on the 1st of June 1899, and aggregate capital falling during the
same period from $698,454,665 to $610,028,895.

A new extension was given to the national banking system by the provisions
of the gold standard law of 14th March 1900. Banks were authorized to issue
circulation to the full par-value of bonds deposited, and the tax upon
circulation was reduced from 1% to ½ of 1% in the case of circulation which
was secured by the 2% refunding bonds, which were authorized by this law.
By issuing 2% bonds in exchange for those paying a higher interest, at
approximately the market-price, it became possible to obtain a given amount
of notes upon a smaller investment in bonds, independent of other
provisions of the law. Under these provisions the volume of notes
outstanding, secured by bonds, which stood on the 31st of October 1899 at
$207,920,774, reached on the same date in 1900, $298,829,064; in 1901,
$328,198,613; in 1902, $335,783,189; in 1903, $380,650,821; in 1904,
$424,530,581; in 1905, $490,037,806; in 1906, $536,933,169; and in 1907
$562,727,614.

The lowest denomination of national bank-notes authorized by law is $5, and
not more than one-third of any bank's issues can be of this denomination.
The government issues notes for $1 and $2, as well as for higher
denominations. The largest amount of bank-notes of one denomination is in
bills for $10, which on the 31st of October 1907 constituted $249,946,530
in total outstanding issues of $609,905,441. Of this total circulation
$562,727,614 was secured by bonds, and the remainder, $47,252,852, was
covered by lawful money in the government treasury, deposited for the
redemption and retirement of the notes as they might be received.

An important extension of the national system resulted from the authority
given by the act of 1900 to incorporate national banks with a capital as
low as $25,000, in places having a population not in excess of 3000. The
previous minimum limit had been $50,000. Under this provision there were
incorporated to the 31st of October 1907 2389 national banks with capitals
of less than $50,000, with aggregate capital of $62,312,500, of which 272
banks were conversions of state and private institutions, 752 were
reorganizations and 1365 were new institutions.

The national banks possess most of the powers of commercial banks, but are
not permitted to hold real estate other than their banking houses, unless
taken for debt. Five reports are required each year to the comptroller of
the currency at dates selected by him without notice, and each bank is
subject to the visitation of bank examiners acting under the comptroller.
No reserves against notes are required by existing law except 5%, which is
[v.03 p.0348] kept in Washington for current redemption purposes. The
redemption system is defective in that redemptions are not authorized at
other places, and the notes reach the treasury on an average only about
once in two years. For many years the banks were prohibited from retiring
more than $3,000,000 of notes monthly, but the limit was raised by an act
of 4th March 1907 to $9,000,000 per month.

Reserves are required against deposits to the amount of 25% in so-called
"reserve cities," and 15% in what are called the "country banks" outside of
reserve cities. Not all these amounts, however, are required to be kept in
cash. The three central reserve cities, where cash is required, with only
trifling deductions, are New York, Chicago and St Louis. In other reserve
cities, which in 1908 numbered forty, the banks are permitted to deposit
half their cash in national banks in central reserve cities, while country
banks may deposit three-fifths of their cash in any reserve city. The
shareholders of national banks are subject in case of liquidation to double
liability upon their shares, and this is now the rule in most of the
conservative state banking systems. National bank-notes are not legal
tender, but are receivable by the government for all obligations except
customs dues.

The panic of 1907 imposed a severe strain upon the cash resources of the
banks of New York City, but did not cause any such considerable number of
failures as occurred in 1893.

Payment of cheques in currency was suspended in New York on the 28th of
October 1907, and continued until about the beginning of the year 1908. The
panic was precipitated by over-speculation by a group of national banks,
followed by the suspension of the Knickerbocker Trust Company on the 22nd
of October with deposits of $48,000,000. Then came runs on other companies,
a deficit in the required reserves of New York banks of $38,838,825 in the
week of 2nd November, and arrangements for the importation of foreign gold
to an amount which soon approached $100,000,000. With an increase during
the autumn of about $77,000,000 in national bank circulation, a transfer of
$72,000,000 from the treasury to the banks, and a further decline in
required reserves in New York during the next week, the amount of currency
which was added to the circulation or disappeared during a few weeks of the
panic amounted to more than $275,000,000, or nearly one-tenth of the usual
volume of circulation in the country. The total bank-note circulation on
the 28th of December 1907 had risen to $687,340,835; but this amount was
abnormal and was reduced somewhat during the spring of 1908.

The position of the trust companies, especially those of the city of New
York, was one of the disturbing features of the panic. These companies were
comparatively a small factor in New York finance at the time of the panic
of 1893. The capitalization of all the trust companies in the United
States, even as late as 1897, was only $106,968,253, and individual
deposits were $566,922,205. The capital of these companies had risen in
1907 to $276,146,081 and their deposits to $2,061,623,035. The trust
companies of New York were required by the law of the state to maintain
only 5% of their demand deposits in cash in their vaults. Whilst most of
them had also large amounts on deposit in national banks, these reserves
proved inadequate to sustain the vast mass of credit which was built upon
them. The absolute amount of the reserves, however, was perhaps less
important than the class of business to which some of the less conservative
of these companies had committed themselves. Instead of keeping their
assets liquid by purchases of commercial paper and loans on first-class
negotiable securities, they had in some cases engaged in speculative
underwritings and had locked up their funds in enterprises requiring a long
time for their consummation.

It was these combined influences which led to distrust of the Knickerbocker
Trust Company, and to the runs upon that company and others during the late
days of October and early November. The result was to reduce the total
resources of the forty-eight trust companies of Greater New York from
$1,205,019,700 on the 22nd of August 1907 to $858,674,000 on the 19th of
December 1907. Individual deposits subject to cheque fell from $692,744,900
to $437,733,400. Such a reduction of resources within so short a time, most
of it being accomplished within a few weeks, has hardly ever been recorded
in the history of banking, and the fact that the stronger companies were
able to call in their cash and meet such demands was evidence to a certain
extent that the criticisms upon them were exaggerated. The necessity for
stronger reserves and for greater safeguards against speculative operations
was so strongly impressed upon the public mind, however, that several
restrictive measures were enacted at the session of the New York
legislature in 1908, designed to prevent any abuses of this sort in the
future.

The function of issuing notes, which is exclusively a privilege of national
banks, has diminished in importance in America, as other methods of
transferring credit have attained a wide development. This has not only
been true of the national banks themselves, but has accounted for the
development alongside the national banking system of state banks, private
banks and trust companies, which have not had the privilege of note-issue,
but have obtained other privileges sometimes greater than those of the
national banks.

The aggregate resources of all classes of banks in the United States have
greatly increased in recent years. The following table shows the increase
in the chief items of the accounts of national banks for representative
years from the reports made nearest to the beginning of the year:--

           PROGRESS OF NATIONAL BANKS, 1865-1908
  +--------+----------+-------------------+-----------------+
  |        |  No of   |     Loans and     |    Individual   |
  | Year.  |  Banks   |     Discounts.    |     Deposits    |
  +--------+----------+-------------------+-----------------+
  | 1865   |    638   |    $166,448,718   |    $183,479,636 |
  | 1870   |   1615   |     688,875,203   |     546,236,881 |
  | 1875   |   2027   |     955,862,580   |     682,846,607 |
  | 1880   |   2052   |     933,543,661   |     755,459,966 |
  | 1885   |   2664   |   1,234,202,226   |     987,649,055 |
  | 1890   |   3326   |   1,811,686,891   |   1,436,402,685 |
  | 1895   |   3737   |   1,991,913,123   |   1,695,489,346 |
  | 1897   |   3661   |   1,901,160,110   |   1,639,688,393 |
  | 1899   |   3590   |   2,214,394,838   |   2,225,269,813 |
  | 1900   |   3602   |   2,479,819,494   |   2,380,610,361 |
  | 1901   |   3942   |   2,706,534,643   |   2,623,997,521 |
  | 1902   |   4291   |   3,038,255,447   |   2,964,417,965 |
  | 1903   |   4666   |   3,303,148,091   |   3,152,878,796 |
  | 1904   |   5180   |   3,469,195,043   |   3,300,619,898 |
  | 1905   |   5528   |   3,728,166,086   |   3,612,499,598 |
  | 1906   |   5911   |   4,071,041,164   |   4,088,420,135 |
  | 1907   |   6288   |   4,463,267,629   |   4,115,650,294 |
  | 1908   |   6625   |   4,585,337,094   |   4,176,873,717 |
  +--------+----------+-------------------+-----------------+

The combined returns of state and private banks, savings banks and loan and
trust companies in the United States show a growth within a few years which
is indicated by the principal items of their accounts:--

      RESOURCES OF STATE BANKS, TRUST COMPANIES, &c.

  +-----------------------+------------------+----------------+
  |   Items.              |     1897.        |     1907.      |
  +-----------------------+------------------+----------------+
  | Capital stock         |   $380,090,778   |   $807,178,262 |
  | Surplus and profits   |    382,436,990   |    924,655,010 |
  | Loans                 |  2,231,013,262   |  6,099,897,535 |
  | Deposits              |  3,324,254,807   |  8,776,755,207 |
  | Total Resources       |  4,258,677,065   | 11,168,514,516 |
  +-----------------------+------------------+----------------+

The aggregate banking power of the United States, as computed by the
comptroller of the currency in his annual report for 1907, increased from
$5,150,000,000 in 1890 to $17,824,800,000 in 1907, and the banking power of
foreign countries from $10,835,000,000 to $27,034,200,000, representing an
increase for all reporting countries from $15,985,000,000 to
$44,859,000,000.

The system of clearing cheques has attained a higher development in the
United States than in any other country, except perhaps, Great Britain.
Clearing-houses exist in about 112 leading cities, and the aggregate
clearings for the year ending 30th September 1907 reached $154,662,515,258.
The New York Clearing-House inevitably does a large proportion of this
business; its clearings constituted in 1906 67.2% of the total clearings in
55 of the larger cities. The volume of clearings fluctuates greatly with
the volume of stock-exchange transactions and with the business prosperity
of the country. An indication of these fluctuations at New York is afforded
by the following table, taken from Conant's _Principles of Money and
Banking_, brought down to 1907.

[v.03 p.0349]

  VARIATIONS IN CLEARINGS AT NEW YORK

  +------+-------------+-------------+-----------------------------+
  |      |   Average   |  Per cent   |                             |
  |Year. |    Daily    | Balances to |          Remarks.           |
  |      |  Clearings. |  Clearings. |                             |
  +------+-------------+-------------+-----------------------------+
  | 1870 | $90,274,479 |    3.72     |                             |
  | 1873 | 115,885,794 |    4.15     | Great business activity.    |
  | 1874 |  74,692,574 |    5.62     | Industrial depression.      |
  | 1881 | 159,232,191 |    3.66     | Renewal of railway building.|
  | 1885 |  82,789,480 |    5.12     | Results of bank panic.      |
  | 1890 | 123,074,139 |    4.65     | Business expansion.         |
  | 1894 |  79,704,426 |    6.54     | Depression following panic. |
  | 1896 |  96,232,442 |    6.28     | Free silver panic.          |
  | 1899 | 189,961,029 |    5.37     | Renewed confidence and      |
  |      |             |             |   activity.                 |
  | 1901 | 254,193,639 |    4.56     | Culmination of industrial   |
  |      |             |             |   flotations.               |
  | 1904 | 195,648,514 |    5.20     | Diminished stock-exchange   |
  |      |             |             |   and business activity.    |
  | 1906 | 342,422,773 |    3.69     | Stock-market activity.      |
  +------+-------------+-------------+-----------------------------+

The Clearing-House Committee of the New York Clearing-House exercises a
powerful influence over the banking situation through its ability to refuse
aid in emergencies to a bank which is unwisely conducted. This power was
used in the panic of 1907 to eliminate several important, but speculative,
financial interests from control of national banks. Only national and state
banks and the sub-Treasury were members of the Clearing-House at this time.
Their weekly reports of condition were awaited every Saturday as an index
of the state of the money-market and the exchanges; but this index was
incomplete and sometimes misleading, because regular weekly reports were
not made by trust companies. It was announced early in 1908 by the state
superintendent of banking that he would exercise a power vested in him by
law to require weekly reports in future from trust companies, so that the
two classes of reports would present a substantially complete mirror of
banking conditions in New York.

AUTHORITIES.--William M. Gouge, _A History of Paper Money and Banking in
the United States_ (Philadelphia, 1833); Condy Raguet, _A Treatise on
Currency and Banking_ (Philadelphia, 1840); J. S. Gibbons, _The Banks of
New York, their Dealers, the Clearing-House and the Panic of 1857_ (New
York, 1858); Albert S. Bolles. _Financial History of the United States_ (3
vols., New York, 1884-1886); Charles F. Dunbar, _Chapters on the Theory and
History of Banking_ (New York and London, 1891); Horace White, _Money and
Banking_ (Boston, 1902); Charles A. Conant, _A History of Modern Banks of
Issue_ (New York, 1896); Alexander D. Noyes, _Thirty Years of American
Finance_ (New York, 1898); Davis Rich Dewey, _Financial History of the
United States_ (New York and London, 1903); John C. Schwab, _The
Confederate States of America_, 1861-1865 (New York, 1901); David Kinley,
_The Independent Treasury of the United States_ (New York, 1893); _Report
of the Monetary Commission of the Indianapolis Convention_ (Chicago, 1898);
Charles A. Conant, _The Principles of Money and Banking_ (2 vols., New
York, 1905); William G. Sumner, _A History of American Currency_ (New York,
1884); Amos Kidder Fiske, _The Modern Bank_ (New York, 1904); William G.
Sumner, _A History of Banking in the United States_ (New York, 1896), being
vol. i. in _A History of Banking in All the Leading Nations_; John Jay
Knox, _History of Banking in the United States_ (rev. ed., New York, 1900);
and R. C. H. Catterall, _The Second Bank of the United States_ (Chicago,
1903).

Much statistical information is contained in the annual reports of the
comptroller of the currency of the United States, published annually at
Washington.

(C. A. C.)

ENGLISH LAW AFFECTING BANKS AND THEIR CUSTOMERS

_Issue of Notes_.--The legislation which culminated in the Bank Charter
Acts of 1844 and 1845 secured to the Bank of England the absolute monopoly
of the note issue within the city of London and a 3-m. radius. Outside that
radius, and within 65 m. of the city, there is a concurrent right in banks,
consisting of six or less than six persons, established before 1844, and
issuing notes at that date; beyond the 65-m. radius the privilege may be
exercised by all banks established before 1844, and then issuing notes, who
have not since lost their right to do so by bankruptcy, abandonment of
business, or temporary suspension of issue. According to some authorities,
the effect of 20 and 21 Vict. cap. 49, sec. 12 [re-enacted Companies
Consolidation Act 1908, sec. 286 (d)] was to sanction the increase in the
constitution of any bank issuing notes outside the 3-m. and within the
65-m. radius from six to ten persons without affecting the power to issue
notes. The rule as formulated above is, however, that enunciated by Bowen
J. in _Capital and Counties Bank_ v. _Bank of England_, 1889; 61 L.T. 516.
The increase in the number of joint-stock banks and the gradual absorption
of the smaller and older concerns have had the effect of minimizing the
output of notes other than those issued by the Bank of England, and, as
exemplified by the case of _The Attorney-General_ v. _Birkbeck_, 12 Q.B.D.
57, it would seem impossible to devise any scheme by which the note-issuing
power of an absorbed bank could be continued to the new or amalgamated
body. But a bank having the right would not necessarily lose it by
absorbing other banks (_Capital and Counties Bank_ v. _Bank of England_).
Foreign banks may establish branches in Great Britain on complying with the
regulations imposed on them by the Companies Consolidation Act 1908, but
cannot apparently issue notes, even though payable abroad.

[Sidenote: Relation between banker and customer.]

_Deposit Business_.--The term "bank of deposit" gives a mistaken idea of
the real relation between banker and customer. So long ago as 1848 it was
decided by the House of Lords in _Foley_ v. _Hill_, 2 H. of L. 28, that the
real relation between banker and customer was that of debtor and creditor,
not in any sense that of trustee and _cestui que trust_, or depositee and
depositor, as had been formerly supposed and contended. The ordinary
process by which a man pays money in to his account at his banker's is in
law simply lending the money to the banker; it fixes the banker with no
fiduciary relation, and he is in no way responsible to the customer for the
use he may make of the money so paid in. And as being a mere debt, a
customer's right to recover money paid in is barred on the expiration of
six years by the Statute of Limitations, if there has been no payment
meantime on account of principal or interest, and no acknowledgment
sufficient to bar the statute (_Pott_ v. _Clegg_, 16 M. & W. 321). Such a
state of affairs, however, is hardly likely to arise, inasmuch as, in the
absence of specific appropriation, earlier drawings out are attributed to
the earlier payments in, as in the ordinary case of current accounts, and
so the items on the credit and debit side cancel each other. An apparent
exception to this system of appropriation exists in cases where a man
wrongfully pays into his own account moneys held by him in a fiduciary
capacity. In such circumstances he is presumed to have drawn out his own
moneys rather than those affected by the trust, and so long as the account
is in credit, any balance will be attributed to the trust money. As between
contending claims to the money, based on different breaches of trust, the
ordinary rule of appropriation will apply.

[Sidenote: Cheques.]

It has often been suggested that the only method of withdrawing money from
a banker is by cheque, that the presentation of a cheque is a condition
precedent to the liability of the banker to repay. This is not so; such
view being inconsistent with the cases establishing the effect of the
Statute of Limitations on money left in a banker's hands, and with the
numerous cases in which a balance at a bank has been attached as a simple
and unconditional debt by a garnishee order, as, for instance, in _Rogers_
v. _Whiteley_, 1892, A.C. 118. The banker's position with regard to cheques
is that, superadded to the relation of debtor and creditor, there is an
obligation to honour the customer's cheques provided the banker has a
sufficient and available balance in his hands for the purpose (_Foley_ v.
_Hill_). If, having such funds in his hands, the banker dishonours a
cheque, he is liable to the customer in substantial damages without proof
of actual injury having accrued (_Rolin_ v. _Steward_, 14 C.B. 595). Where
several cheques are presented simultaneously and the available balance is
insufficient to pay all, the banker should pay as many as the funds will
cover, and is not bound to discriminate between particular cheques. It
would seem a legitimate condition that a cheque should be drawn in the
ordinary recognized form, not in one raising any question or doubt as to
its validity or effect. Cheques drawn to "wages or order," "petty cash or
order," or the like, are common, and are sometimes regarded as payable to
bearer. Such payees are not, however, "fictitious or non-existent persons,"
so as to render the cheques payable to the bearer under sec. 7, subs. 3 of
the Bills of Exchange Act 1882, nor can such payees endorse. Some banks
refuse to pay such cheques, and it is conceived they are justified in so
doing. Money paid in so shortly before the presentation of the cheque that
there would not have been time to pass it through the books of the bank
would not be treated as available for drawing against. If a person have an
account at one branch of a bank, he is not entitled to draw cheques on
another branch [v.03 p.0350] where he has either no account or is
overdrawn, but the bank has, as against the customer, the right to combine
accounts at different branches and treat them as one account (_Garnet_ v.
_McEwen_, L.R. 8 Ex. 10). Funds are not available so long as a garnishee
order, founded on a judgment against the customer, is pending, since it
attaches all moneys on current account irrespective of the amount of the
judgment (_Rogers_ v. _Whiteley_).

The very questionable practice of post-dating cheques has been the source
of considerable doubt and inconvenience to bankers. The use of such
documents enables the drawer to obtain the results of a bill at a fixed
future date without the expense of a regular bill-stamp. But the Bills of
Exchange Act 1882, sec. 13, subs. 1, provides that "a bill is not invalid
by reason only that it is ante-dated or post-dated, or that it bears date
on a Sunday." The banker cannot therefore refuse to pay a cheque presented
after the apparent date of its issue on the ground that he knows it to have
been post-dated. On the other hand, he is entitled and indeed bound to
refuse payment if such a cheque is presented before the apparent date of
its issue (_Morley_ v. _Culverwell_, 7 M. & W. at p. 178). Revocation of
authority to pay a cheque must come to the banker's conscious knowledge and
be unequivocal both in terms and method of communication. He is not bound
to act on an unconfirmed telegram (_Curtice_ v. _London City & Midland
Bank_ [1908], 1 K.B. 293). The banker's authority to pay cheques is
terminated by the death, insanity or bankruptcy of the customer, or by
notice of an available act of bankruptcy committed by him.

The banker is bound to observe secrecy with respect to the customer's
account, unless good cause exists for disclosure, and the obligation does
not cease if the account becomes overdrawn (_Hardy_ v. _Veasey_, L.R. 3 Ex.
107). In England a cheque is not an assignment of funds in the banker's
hands (Bills of Exchange Act 1882, sec. 53). The holder of the cheque has
therefore no claim on the banker in the event of payment being refused, his
remedy being against the drawer and endorser, if any. On this section is
also based the custom of English bankers not to pay part of the amount of a
cheque where there are funds, though not sufficient to meet the whole
amount. The section does not apply to Scotland, where it would seem that
the bank is bound to pay over what funds it has towards satisfaction of the
cheque. A banker is entitled to hold paid cheques as vouchers until there
has been a settlement of account between him and the customer. The entries
in a pass-book constitute _prima facie_ evidence against the banker, and
when returned by the customer without comment, against him; but the
proposition that such return constitutes a settlement of account has been
much disputed. Indeed where forgery is the ground of repudiation of a
cheque, no dealings or omissions of the customer with regard to the
pass-book would seem to preclude him from objecting to being debited and
throwing the loss on the banker (_Kepitigalla Rubber Co._ v. _National Bank
of India_, 25 Times L.R. 402). As against the banker, however, credit
entries in the pass-book cannot be disputed if the customer has altered his
position in reliance thereon, and cheques drawn against an apparent balance
must be honoured (_Holland_ v. _Manchester & Liverpool District Bank_, 25
Times L.R. 386).

The rule by which the holder of a cheque has no direct recourse against the
banker who dishonours it, holds good even where the banker has before issue
marked the cheque as good for the amount, such marking not amounting to an
acceptance by the banker. As between banker and banker, however, such
marking or certifying probably amounts to a binding representation that the
cheque will be paid, and, if done by request of the drawer, the latter
cannot subsequently revoke the authority to pay. In certain circumstances,
marking at the instance of the person presenting the cheque for payment may
amount to an undertaking by the banker to hold the money for his benefit
(_In re Beaumont_ [1902], 1 Ch. p. 895).

A banker either paying or collecting money on a cheque to which the person
tendering it for payment or collection has no title or a defective title is
_prima facie_ liable to the true owner for conversion or money had and
received, notwithstanding he acted in perfect good faith and derived no
benefit from the operation. Payment of an open cheque, payable to bearer
either originally or by endorsement, is, however, in all cases a good
payment and discharge (_Charles_ v. _Blackwell_, 2 C.P.D. at p. 158).
Limited protection in other cases has been extended by legislation to the
banker with regard to both payment and collection of cheques, usually on
the principle of counterbalancing some particular risk imposed on him by
enactments primarily designed to safeguard the public.

By sec. 19 of the Stamp Act 1853, the banker paying a draft or order
payable to order on demand, drawn upon him, was relieved from liability in
the event of the endorsement having been forged or unauthorized. This
enactment was not repealed by the Bills of Exchange Act 1882, and, in
_London City & Midland Bank_ v. _Gordon_ (1903), A.C. 240, was held to
cover the case of drafts drawn by a branch of a bank on its head office.
Sec. 60 of the Bills of Exchange Act 1882 extends like protection to the
banker in the case of cheques, the definition of which therein as "bills
drawn on a banker payable on demand" debars drafts of the above-mentioned
description. Such definition, involving the unconditional character of the
instrument, also precludes from the protection of this section the
documents now frequently issued by corporations and others, which direct
bankers to make payments on a specific attached receipt being duly signed
(_London City & Midland Bank_ v. _Gordon_). Sec. 17 of the Revenue Act
1883, however, applies to these documents the crossed cheques sections of
the Bills of Exchange Act 1882 (see _Bavius, Jr., & Sims_ v. _London &
South-Western Bank_ [1900], 1 Q.B. 270), while denying them the position of
negotiable instruments, and a banker paying one of them crossed, in
accordance with the crossing and in the absence of any indication of its
having been transferred, could probably claim immunity under sec. 80. The
Bills of Exchange Act 1882 contains no direct prohibition against a banker
paying a crossed cheque otherwise than in accordance with the crossing, but
if he do so he is liable to the true owner for any loss suffered by him in
consequence of such payment (sec. 79), and is probably unable to charge his
customer with the amount. A banker paying a crossed cheque in accordance
with its ostensible tenor obtains protection under sec. 80 and the proviso
to sec. 79. Questions have arisen as to the bearing of the crossed cheques
sections when a crossed cheque drawn on one branch of a bank is paid in for
collection by a customer at another branch; but the transaction is so
obviously a legitimate and necessary one that either by the collecting
branch may be regarded as a separate bank for this purpose, or sec. 79 may
be ignored as inapplicable (_Gordon_ v. _London City & Midland Bank_
[1902], 1 K.B. 242 C.A.).

The collection of crossed cheques for a customer being virtually incumbent
on a banker, qualified immunity is accorded him in so doing by sec. 82, a
final exposition of which was given by the House of Lords in _London City &
Midland Bank_ v. _Gordon_ (1903), A.C. 240. To come within its provisions,
the banker must fulfil the following conditions. He must receive the cheque
from, and the money for, a customer, _i.e._ a person with whom he has
definite and existing business relations (see _Great Western Ry. Co._ v.
_London & County Bank_ [1901], A.C. 414). He must take the cheque already
crossed generally or specially to himself. His own crossing under sec. 77
is absolutely inefficacious in this connexion. He must take the cheque and
receive the money in good faith and without negligence. Negligence in this
relation is the omission to exercise due care in the interest of the true
owner, not necessarily the customer. To avoid this disqualification of
negligence, the banker must see that the endorsements, where necessary, are
ostensibly correct; he must satisfy himself of the authority where an
endorsement is per procuration; he must not take for private account a
cheque which on its face indicates that the holder is in possession of it
as agent, or in an official capacity, or for partnership purposes
(_Hannan's Lake View Central Ld._ v. _Armstrong & Co._, 16 Times L.R. 236;
_Bevan_ v. _National Bank_, 23 Times L.R. 65); he must not take a cheque
marked "account payee" for an account other than that [v.03 p.0351]
indicated (_Bevan_ v. _National Bank_). It is further demonstrated by the
Gordon case that the banker only secures protection so long as he is acting
strictly as a conduit pipe, or as agent for the customer. If he put himself
in the position of owner of the cheque, he no longer fulfils the condition
of receiving the money only for the customer. In the Gordon case, adoption
of the not uncommon practice of crediting cheques as cash in the bank's
books before the money was actually received was held equivalent to taking
them as transferee or owner, and to debar the bank from the protection of
sec. 82. The anxiety and inconvenience caused to bankers by this unexpected
decision was ultimately removed by the Bills of Exchange (Crossed Cheques)
Act 1906, which enacts that a banker receives payment of a crossed cheque
for a customer within the meaning of sec. 82 of the Bills of Exchange Act
1882, notwithstanding that he credits his customer's account with the
amount of the cheque before receiving payment thereof. Apparently the scope
of this act must be confined to its immediate object, and it does not
affect the relations and rights between the banker and his customer or
parties to the cheque arising from such crediting as cash. For instance,
the customer, in the absence of agreement to the contrary, may at once draw
against cheques so credited, while the banker may still debit the customer
with the amount of the cheque if returned unpaid, or sue the drawer or
indorser thereon.

The protection to the collecting banker is in no way affected by the cheque
being crossed "not negotiable," or by the nature of the fraud or crime by
which the cheque was obtained by the customer or any previous possessor,
although there are dicta which have been interpreted in the contrary sense.
Nor does the fact that the customer is overdrawn deprive the banker of the
character of a collecting agent, unless the cheque be definitely given and
taken in reduction of such overdraft. Where the conditions requisite for
protection exist, the protection covers not only the receipt of the money,
but all operations usual in business and leading up to such receipt, on the
basis of the customer's title being unimpeachable. The provisions of the
crossed cheques sections of the Bills of Exchange Act 1882 are extended to
dividend warrants by sec. 95 of that act, and to certain orders for payment
issued by a customer of a banker by sec. 17 of the Revenue Act 1883, as
before stated. But the wording of the Bills of Exchange (Crossed Cheques)
Act 1906, specifying as it does cheques alone, appears to exclude documents
of both these classes from its operation. With regard to the orders for
payment, inasmuch as the same section which brings them within the crossed
cheques sections expressly provides that they shall not be negotiable, a
banker would probably be protected only in taking them from the specified
payee, though this distinction has been ignored in some recently decided
cases.

[Sidenote: Fraud.]

Where a banker incurs loss through forgery or fraud in circumstances not
covered by statutory protection, his right to relief, if any, must depend
on general principles. He cannot charge his customer with payments made on
a forgery of that customer's signature, on the ground either that he is
presumed to know such signature or that the payment is unauthorized. But if
the customer has accredited the forgery, or, having knowledge or reasonable
ground for belief that it has been committed, has failed to warn the
banker, who has thereby suffered loss or prejudice, the customer will be
held estopped from disputing the banker's right to debit him with the
amount (_Vagliano_ v. _Bank of England_ [1891], A.C. 107; _McKenzie_ v.
_British Linen Co._ 6 A.C. 82; _Ewing_ v. _Dominion Bank_ [1904], A.C.
806). The doctrine of the fictitious person as payee may also exonerate a
banker who has paid an order bill to a wrongful possessor. Payment on a
forgery to an innocent holder is payment under mistake of fact; but the
ordinary right of the payor to recover money so paid is subordinated to the
necessity of safeguarding the characteristics of negotiability. Views
differ as to whether the recovery is precluded only where the opportunity
of giving notice of dishonour is lost or prejudiced by delay in reclaiming
payment, or whether mere possibility of damage is sufficient (cf. _London &
River Plate Bank_ v. _Bank of Liverpool_ [1896], 1 Q.B. 7, and _Imperial
Bank of Canada_ v. _Bank of Hamilton_ [1903], A.C. 49).

Cases have frequently arisen where the carelessness of a customer in
filling up cheques has enabled a person to fraudulently increase the sum
for which such cheques were originally drawn. In _Colonial Bank of
Australasia_ v. _Marshall_ [1906], A.C. 559, the judicial committee of the
privy council held that the affording such facilities for forgery was no
breach of the customer's duty to his banker, and that the latter was not
entitled to debit the customer with more than the original amount. As
before stated, the customer's dealings with the pass-book cannot, in the
present state of the authorities, be relied on as debarring him from
disputing unauthorized payments appearing therein.

[Sidenote: Custody of valuables.]

The payment of bills accepted payable at the bank is not, like the payment
of cheques, an essential obligation of the banker, and the risk involved is
enhanced by the fact that the banker must pay or refuse payment at once, no
interval being allowed for verification of endorsements. The abolition or
modification of the practice has frequently been advocated, but it is one
of the facilities which competition compels bankers to extend to their
customers. On the same basis stands the receipt of a customer's valuables
for safe custody. The question of the banker's responsibility for the loss
of goods so deposited with him was raised, but not decided, in an action
brought by Mrs Langtry against the Union Bank of London in 1896. Certain
jewels belonging to her had been delivered up by the bank to an
unauthorized person on a forged order. The case was settled; but bankers
being desirous to ascertain their real position, many legal opinions were
taken on the point, and after consideration of these, the Central
Association of Bankers issued a memorandum, in which they stated that the
best legal opinion appeared to be that a distinction must be drawn between
cases in which valuables were by mistake delivered to the wrong person and
cases in which they were destroyed, lost, stolen or fraudulently
abstracted, whether by an officer of the bank or some other person. That in
the former case the question of negligence did not arise, the case being
one of wrongful conversion of the goods by a voluntary act for which the
bank was liable apart from any question of negligence. That, in the second
case, that of loss or theft, the banker, being a gratuitous bailee, would
only be liable if he had failed to use such care as an ordinary prudent man
would take of valuables of his own. The latter rule is practically that
laid down in _Giblin_ v. _MacMullen_, L.R. 2 P.C. 318, but in estimating
the amount of care to be taken by the banker, the nature of the goods, if
known or suspected, and the exceptional means of protection at the
disposition of bankers, such as strong-rooms, must be taken into
consideration. Methods of obviating both classes of risk by means of
special receipts have frequently been suggested, but such receipts do not
appear to have come into general use.

[Sidenote: Trustees.]

Theoretically, bankers are supposed to refuse accounts which are either
expressedly or are known to be trust accounts. In practice, however, it is
by no means uncommon to find accounts opened with a definite heading
indicating the fiduciary capacity. In other cases, circumstances exist
which affect the banker with notice of that capacity. In either case,
however, the obligation to honour the customer's cheque is the predominant
factor, and the banker is not bound or entitled to question the propriety
or object of the cheque, unless he has very clear evidence of impending
fraud (_Gray_ v. _Johnston_, L.R. 3 H. of L. 1). Even though the banker
have derived some personal benefit from the transaction, it cannot be
impeached unless the banker's conduct amount in law to his being party or
privy to the fraud, as where he has stipulated or pressed for the
settlement or reduction of an ascertained overdraft on private account,
which has been effected by cheque on the trust account (_Coleman_ v. _Bucks
& Oxon Union Bank_ [1897], 2 Ch. 243). A banker is entitled, in dealing
with trust moneys, known to be such, to insist on the authority of the
whole body of trustees, direct and not deputed, and this is probably the
safest course to adopt. Scarcely larger responsibility devolves on Joint
Stock Banks appointed custodian trustees under the Public Trustee Act 1906,
[v.03 p.0352] a remunerative position involving custody of trust funds and
securities, and making and receiving payments on behalf of the estate,
while leaving the active direction thereof in the hands of the managing
trustees.

[Sidenote: Bill-discounting.]

Other incidents of the ordinary practice of banking are the discounting of
bills, the keeping of deposit accounts, properly so called, and the making
of advances to customers, counting either by way of definite loan or
arranged overdraft. So far as the discounting of bills is concerned, there
is little to differentiate the position of the banker from that of any
ordinary bill-discounter. It has been contended, however, that the peculiar
attribute of the banker's lien entitled him to hold funds of the customer
against his liability on current discounted bills. This contention was
ultimately disposed of by _Bowen_ v. _Foreign & Colonial Gas Company_, 22
W.R. 740, where it was pointed out that the essential object of a
customer's discounting bills with his banker was to feed the current
account, and that a possible liability constituted no set-off against an
existing debt. Whether a particular bill has been taken for discount or
collection is a question of fact. As in the payment of bills, so in the
collection of them, there is no statutory protection whatever for the
banker; as against third parties he can only rely either on the customer's
title or his own as a holder for value, if no forged endorsement intervene
and he can establish a consideration.

[Sidenote: Deposit accounts.]

A deposit account, whether at call or on fixed notice, does not constitute
any fiduciary relation between the depositor and the banker, but merely a
debt due from the latter to the former. It has been suggested that cheques
can be drawn against deposit account on call, and, though a banker might
safely honour such a cheque, relying, if necessary, on his right of lien or
set-off, there appears no legal right in the customer to enforce such
payment. Deposit receipts given by bankers are exempt from stamp duty, even
though they contain an undertaking with respect to payment of principal and
interest. They are clearly not negotiable instruments, but it is difficult
to deduce from the cases how far dealings with them may amount to an
equitable assignment of the moneys they represent. Probably deliberate
definite transfer, coupled with endorsement, would confer an effective
title to such moneys. Where, as is not uncommon, the form of deposit note
includes a cheque, the banker could not refuse to pay were the cheque
presented and any superadded formalities complied with.

[Sidenote: Overdrafts and advances.]

There is no obligation on a banker to permit his customer to overdraw,
apart from agreement express or implied from course of business. Drawing a
cheque or accepting a bill payable at the banker's which there are not
funds meet is an implied request for an overdraft, which the banker may or
may not comply with. Interest is clearly chargeable on overdrafts whether
stipulated for or not. There is no direct authority establishing this right
in the banker, and interest is not usually recoverable on mere debts, but
the charge is justifiable on the ground of the universal custom of bankers,
if not otherwise. The charging of compound interest or interest with
periodical rests has been supported where such system of keeping the
accounts has been brought to the notice of the customer by means of the
pass-book, and not objected to by him, but in the present attitude of the
courts towards the pass-book some further recognition would seem necessary.
Such system of charging interest, even when fully recognized, only prevails
so long as the relation of banker and customer, on which it is founded,
continues in force; the taking a mortgage for the existing debt would put
an end to it.

[Sidenote: Lien.]

The main point in which advances made by bankers differ from those made by
other people is the exceptional right possessed by bankers of securing
repayment by means of the banker's lien. The banker's lien is part of the
law merchant and entitles him, in the absence of agreement express or
implied to the contrary, to retain and apply, in discharge of the
customer's liability to him, any securities of the customer coming into his
possession in his capacity as banker. It includes bills and cheques paid in
for collection (_Currie_ v. _Misa_, 1 A.C. 564). Either by virtue of it, or
his right of set-off, the banker can retain moneys paid in by or received
for the credit of the customer, against the customer's debt to him. Goods
deposited for safe custody or moneys paid in to meet particular bills are
exempt from the lien, the purpose for which they come to the banker's hands
being inconsistent with the assertion of the lien. The existence of the
banker's lien entitles him to sue all parties to bills or cheques by virtue
of sec. 27, subs. 3 of the Bills of Exchange Act, and to the extent of his
advances his title is independent of that of the previous holder. Moreover,
the banker's lien, though so termed, is really in effect an implied pledge,
and confers the rights of realization on default pertaining to that class
of bailment. But with regard to the exercise of his lien, as in many other
phases of his relation to his customer, the banker's strict rights may be
curtailed or circumscribed by limitations arising out of course of
business. The principle, based either on general equity or estoppel and
independent of definite agreement or consideration, requires that when
dealings between banker and customer have for a reasonable space of time
proceeded on a recognized footing, the banker shall not suddenly break away
from such established order of things and assert his strict legal rights to
the detriment of the customer. By the operation of this rule, the banker
may be precluded from asserting his lien in particular cases, as for
instance for an overdraft on one account against another which had
habitually been kept and operated on separately. It equally prevents the
dishonouring of cheques in circumstances in which they have hitherto been
paid independent of the actual available balance.

Restrictions arising from course of business can of course be put an end to
by the banker, but only on reasonable notice to the customer and by
providing for outstanding liabilities undertaken by the latter in reliance
on the continuance of the pre-existing state of affairs (see _Buckingham_
v. _London & Midland Bank_, 12 Times L.R. 70). As against this, the banker
can, in some cases, fortify his position by appeal to the custom of
bankers. The validity of such custom, provided it be general and
reasonable, has frequently been recognized by the courts. Any person
entering on business relations with a banker must be taken to contemplate
the existence of such custom and implicitly agree that business shall be
conducted in accordance therewith. Practical difficulty has been suggested
with regard to proof of any such custom not already recognized in law, as
to how far it can be established by the evidence of one party, the bankers,
unsupported by that of members of the outside public, in most cases
impossible to obtain. It is conceived, however, that on the analogy of
local custom and the Stock Exchange rules, such outside evidence could be
dispensed with, and this is the line apparently indicated with relation to
the pass-book by the court of appeal in Vagliano's case (23 Q.B.D. at p.
245). The unquestionable right of the banker to summarily debit his
customer's account with a returned cheque, even when unindorsed by the
customer and taken by the banker in circumstances constituting him a
transferee of the instrument, is probably referable to a custom of this
nature. So is the common practice of bankers to refuse payment of a
so-called "stale" cheque, that is, one presented an unreasonable time after
its ostensible date; although the fact that some banks treat a cheque as
stale after six months, others not till after twelve, might be held to
militate against the validity of such custom, and lapse of time is not
included by the Bills of Exchange Act among the matters working revocation
of the banker's duty, and authority to pay his customer's cheque.
Indirectly, this particular custom obtains some support from sec. 74 (2) of
the Bills of Exchange Act, although the object of that section is
different.

That section does, however, import the custom of bankers into the reckoning
of a reasonable time for the presentation of a cheque, and with other
sections clears up any doubts which might have arisen on the common law as
to the right of the holder of a cheque, whether crossed or not, to employ
his banker for its collection, without imperilling his rights against prior
parties in case of dishonour. On dishonour of a cheque paid in for [v.03
p.0353] collection, the banker is bound to give notice of dishonour. Being
in the position of an agent, he may either give notice to his principal,
the customer, or to the parties liable on the bill. The usual practice of
bankers has always been to return the cheque to the customer, and sec. 49,
subs. 6 of the Bills of Exchange Act is stated to have been passed to
validate this custom. Inasmuch as it only provides for the return of the
dishonoured bill or cheque to the drawer or an endorser it appears to miss
the case of a cheque to bearer or become payable to bearer by blank
endorsement prior to the customer's.

Where a bank or a banker takes a mortgage, legal or equitable, or a
guarantee as cover for advances or overdraft, there is nothing necessarily
differentiating the position from that of any other mortgagee or guaranteed
party. It has, however, fallen to banks to evoke some leading decisions
with respect to the former class of security. In _London Joint Stock Bank_
v. _Simmons_ ([1892], A.C. 201) the House of Lords, professedly explaining
their previous decision in _Sheffield_ v. _London Joint Stock Bank_, 13
A.C. 333, determined that negotiable securities, commercial or otherwise,
may safely be taken in pledge for advances, though the person tendering
them is, from his known position, likely to be holding them merely as agent
for other persons, so long as they are taken honestly and there is nothing
tangible, outside the man's position, to arouse suspicion. So again in
_Lloyd's Bank_ v. _Cooke_ [1907], 1 K.B. 794, the bank vindicated the
important principle that the common law of estoppel still obtains with
regard to bills, notes and cheques, save where distinctly annulled or
abrogated by the Bills of Exchange Act, and that therefore a man putting
inchoate negotiable instruments into the hands of an agent for the purpose
of his raising money thereon is responsible to any one taking them bona
fide and for value, although the agent may have fraudulently exceeded and
abused his authority and the case does not fall within the provisions of
the Bills of Exchange Act.

[Sidenote: Guarantees.]

With regard to guarantees, the main incidents peculiarly affecting bankers
are the following. The existence of a guarantee does not oblige the banker
to any particular system of keeping the account. So long as it is not
unfairly manipulated to the detriment of the guarantor, there is no
obligation to put moneys paid in, without appropriation, to the guaranteed
rather than to the unguaranteed account, and on the termination of a
guarantee, the banker may close the account, leaving it to be covered by
the guarantee, and open a new one with the customer, to which he may devote
payments in, not otherwise appropriated. Where by its nature or terms a
continuing guarantee is revocable either summarily or on specified notice,
difficult questions may arise on such revocation as to the banker's duty
and obligations towards the customer, who has probably incurred liabilities
on the strength of the credit afforded by the guarantee. Although the
existence of a guarantee does not bind the banker to advance up to the
prescribed limit, he could not well, on revocation, immediately shut off
all facilities from the customer without notice, while subsequent purely
voluntary advances might not be covered by the guarantee. These
contingencies should therefore be fully provided for by the guarantee,
particularly the crucial period of the pendency of notice.

AUTHORITIES.--The Institute of Bankers (London), _Questions on Banking
Practice_ (6th ed., 1909); J. Douglas Walker, _A Treatise on Banking Law_
(2nd ed., 1885); Chalmers, _Bills of Exchange_ (7th ed., 1909); Sir J. R.
Paget, _The Law of Banking_ (2nd ed., 1908); H. Hart, _The Law of Banking_
(2nd ed., 1906).

(J. R. P.)

[1] A translation of the act of the 3rd of May 1619 may be found in the
appendix to the _Quarterly Journal of Economics_ (Boston, U.S.A.) for April
1892. These documents present a distinct picture of banking in its true
sense.

[2] The clearest account of its early days is found in Thorold Rogers'
_History of the First Nine Years of the Bank of England._

[3] The date 1876 is taken as being that when the Imperial Bank of Germany
came into full operation.

[4] _"The Grasshopper" in Lombard Street_, by John Biddulph Masters (1892).

[5] See _Vorträge und Aufsätze hauptsächlich aus dem Handels- und
Wechselrecht_, von Dr R. Koch, pp. 163-164.

[6] The imperial treasury is bound to pay the state notes in cash at any
time when this is required, but an independent fund of cash set apart for
this purpose does not exist. See _Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften_,
vol. v. art. "Papiergeld," p. 97 (Jena, 1893; ed. J. Conrad, L. Elster, W.
Lexis and E. Löning).