BANTU LANGUAGES. The greater part of Africa south of the equator possesses
but one linguistic family so far as its native inhabitants are concerned.
This clearly-marked division of human speech has been entitled the Bantu, a
name invented by Dr W. H. I. Bleek, and it is, on the whole, the fittest
general term with which to designate the most remarkable group of African
languages.[1]

It must not be supposed for a moment that all the people who speak Bantu
languages belong necessarily to a special and definite type of negro. On
the contrary, though there is a certain physical resemblance among those
tribes who speak clearly-marked Bantu dialects (the Babangi of the upper
Congo, the people of the Great Lakes, the Ova-herero, the Ba-tonga,
Zulu-Kaffirs, Awemba and some of the East Coast tribes), there is
nevertheless a great diversity in outward appearance, shape of head and
other physical characteristics, among the negroes who inhabit Bantu Africa.
Some tribes speaking Bantu languages are dwarfs or dwarfish, and belong to
the group of Forest Pygmies. Others betray relationship to the Hottentots;
others again cannot be distinguished from the most exaggerated types of the
black West African negro. Yet others again, especially on the north, are of
Gala (Galla) or Nilotic origin. But the general deduction to be drawn from
a study of the Bantu languages, as they exist at the present day, is that
at some period not more than 3000 years ago a powerful tribe of negroes
speaking the Bantu mother-language, allied physically to the negroes of the
south-western Nile and southern Lake Chad basins (yet impregnated with the
Caucasian Hamite), pushed themselves forcibly from the very heart of Africa
(the region between the watersheds of the Shari, Congo and western Nile)
into the southern half of the continent, which at that time was probably
sparsely populated except in the north-west, east and south. The Congo
basin and the south-western watershed of the Nile at the time of the Bantu
invasion would have been occupied on the Atlantic seaboard by West Coast
negroes, and in the centre by negroes of a low type and by Forest Pygmies;
the eastern coasts of Victoria Nyanza and the East African coast region
down to opposite Zanzibar probably had a population partly Nilotic-negro
and partly Hottentot-Bushman. From Lakes Tanganyika and Nyasa
south-westwards to the Cape of Good Hope the population was Forest-negro,
Nilotic-negro, Hottentot and Bushman. Over nearly all this area the Bantu
swept; and they assimilated or absorbed the vast majority of the preceding
populations, of which, physically or linguistically, the only survivors are
the scattered tribes of pygmies in the forests of south-west Nile land,
Congo basin and Gabun, the central Sudanese of the N.E. Congo, a few
patches of quasi-Hottentot, Hamitic and Nilotic peoples between Victoria
Nyanza and the Zanzibar coast, and the Bushmen and Hottentots of south-west
Africa. The first area of decided concentration on the part of the Bantu
was very probably Uganda and the shores of Tanganyika. The main line of
advance south-west trended rather to the east coast of Africa than to the
west, but bifurcated at the south end of Lake Tanganyika, one great branch
passing west between that lake and Nyasa, and the other southwards.
Finally, when the Bantu had reached the [v.03 p.0357] south-west corner of
Africa, their farther advance was checked by two causes: first, the
concentration in a healthy, cattle-rearing part of Africa of the Hottentots
(themselves only a superior type of Bushman, but able to offer a much
sturdier resistance to the big black Bantu negroes than the crafty but
feeble Bushmen), and secondly, the arrival on the scene of the Dutch and
British, but for whose final intervention the whole of southern Africa
would have been rapidly Bantuized, as far as the imposition of language was
concerned.

The theory thus set forth of the origin and progress of the Bantu and the
approximate date at which their great southern exodus commenced, is to some
extent attributable to the present writer only, and has been traversed at
different times by other writers on the same subject. In the nearly total
absence of any historical records, the only means of building up Bantu
history lies in linguistic research, in the study of existing dialects, of
their relative degree of purity, of their connexion one with the other and
of the most widely-spread roots common to the majority of the Bantu
languages. The present writer, relying on linguistic evidence, fixed the
approximate date at which the Bantu negroes left their primal home in the
very heart of Africa at not much more than 2000 years ago; and the reason
adduced was worth some consideration. It lay in the root common to a large
proportion of the Bantu languages expressing the domestic fowl--_kuku_
(_nkuku_, _ngoko_, _nsusu_, _nguku_, _nku_). Now the domestic fowl reached
Africa first through Egypt, at the time of the Persian occupation--not
before 500 to 400 B.C. It would take at that time at least a couple of
hundred years before--from people to people and tribe to tribe up the Nile
valley--the fowl, as a domestic bird, reached the equatorial regions of
Africa. The Muscovy duck, introduced by the Portuguese from Brazil at the
beginning of the 17th century, is spreading itself over Negro Africa at
just about the same rate. Yet the Bantu people must have had the domestic
fowl well established amongst themselves before they left their original
home, because throughout Bantu Africa (with rare exceptions and those not
among the purest Bantu tribes) the root expressing the domestic fowl recurs
to the one vocable of _kuku_.[2] Curiously enough this root _kuku_
resembles to a marked degree several of the Persian words for "fowl," and
is no doubt remotely derived from the cry of the bird. Among those Negro
races which do not speak Bantu languages, though they may be living in the
closest proximity to the Bantu, the name for fowl is quite different.[3]
The fowl was only introduced into Madagascar, as far as researches go, by
the Arabs during the historical period, and is not known by any name
similar to the root _kuku_. Moreover, even if the fowl had been (and there
is no record of this fact) introduced from Madagascar on to the east coast
of Africa, it would be indeed strange if it carried with it to Cameroon, to
the White Nile and to Lake Ngami one and the same name. It may, however, be
argued that such a thing is possible, that the introduction of the fowl
south of the equator need not be in any way coincident with the Bantu
invasion, as its name in North Central Africa may have followed it
everywhere among the Bantu peoples. But all other cases of introduced
plants or animals do not support this idea in the least. The Muscovy duck,
for instance, is pretty well distributed throughout Bantu Africa, but it
has no common widely-spread name. Even tobacco (though the root "taba"
turns up unexpectedly in remote parts of Africa) assumes totally different
designations in different Bantu tribes. The Bantu, moreover, remained
faithful to a great number of roots like "fowl," which referred to animals,
plants, implements and abstract concepts known to them in their original
home. Thus there are the root-words for ox (_-ñombe_, _-ombe_, _-nte_),
goat (_-budi_, _-buzi_, _-buri_), pig (_-guluba_), pigeon (_-jiba_),
buffalo (_nyati_), dog (_mbwa_), hippopotamus (_-bugu_, _gubu_), elephant
(_-jobo_, _-joko_), leopard (_ngwi_), house (_-zo_, _-do_, _-yumba_,
_-anda_, _-dago_, _-dabo_), moon (_-ezi_), sun, sky, or God (_-juba_),
water (_-ndi_, _-ndiba_, _mandiba_), lake or river (_-anza_),[4] drum
(_ngoma_), name (_-ina_ or _jina_), wizard (_nganga_), belly, bowel (_-vu_,
_-vumo_), buttocks (_-tako_); adjectives like _-bi_ (bad), _-eru_ (white);
the numerals, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 and 100; verbs like _fwa_ (to die), _ta_ (to
strike, kill), _la (da)_ or _lia_ (_di_, _dia_) (to eat). The root-words
cited are not a hundredth part of the total number of root-words which are
practically common to all the spoken dialects of Bantu Africa. Therefore
the possession amongst its root-words of a common name for "fowl" seems to
the present writer to show conclusively that (1) the original Bantu tribe
must have possessed the domestic fowl before its dispersal through the
southern half of Africa began, and that (2) as it is historically certain
that the fowl as a domestic bird did not reach Egypt before the Persian
conquest in 525 B.C., and probably would not have been transmitted to the
heart of Africa for another couple of hundred years, the Bantu exodus (at
any rate to the south of the equatorial region) may safely be placed at a
date not much anterior to 2100 years ago.

The creation of the Bantu type of language (pronominal-prefix) was
certainly a much more ancient event than the exodus from the Bantu
mother-land. Some form of speech like Fula, Kiama (Tern), or Kposo of
northern Togoland, or one of the languages of the lower Niger or Benue, may
have been taken up by ancient Libyan, Hamite or Nilotic conquerors and cast
into the type which we now know as Bantu,--a division of sexless Negro
speech, however, that shows no obvious traces of Hamitic (Caucasian)
influence. We have no clue at present to the exact birth-place of the Bantu
nor to the particular group of dialects or languages from which it sprang.
Its origin and near relationships are as much a puzzle as is the case with
the Aryan speech. Perhaps in grammatical construction (suffixes taking the
place of prefixes) Fula shows some resemblance; and Fula possesses the
concord in a form considerably like that of the Bantu, as well as offering
affinities in the numerals 3 and 4, and in a _few_ nominal, pronominal and
verbal roots. The Timne and cognate languages of Sierra Leone and the north
Guinea coast use pronominal prefixes and a system of concord, the
employment of the latter being precisely similar to the same practice in
the Bantu languages; but in word-roots (substantives, numerals, pronouns,
verbs) there is absolutely _no_ resemblance with this north Guinea group of
prefix-using languages. In the numerals 2, 3, 4, and sometimes 5, and in a
few verbal roots, there is a distinct affinity between Bantu and the
languages of N. Togoland, the Benue river, lower Niger, Calabar and Gold
Coast. The same thing may be said with less emphasis about the Madi and
_possibly_ the Nyam-Nyam (Makarka) group of languages in Central Africa
_though in none of these forms of speech is there any trace of the
concord_. Prefixes of a simple kind are used in the tongues of Ashanti, N.
Togoland, lower Niger and eastern Niger delta, Cross River and Benue, to
express differences between singular and plural, and also the quality of
the noun; but they do not correspond to those of the Bantu type, though
they sometimes fall into "classes." In the north-west of the Bantu field,
in the region between Cameroon and the north-western basin of the Congo,
the Cross river and the Benue, there is an area of great extent occupied by
languages of a "semi-Bantu" character, such as Nki, Mbudikum, Akpa, Mbe,
Bayoñ, Manyañ, Bafut and Bansh[=o], and the Munshi, Jaráwa, Kororofa,
Kamuku and Gbari of the central and western Benue basin. The resemblances
to the Bantu in certain word-roots are of an obvious nature; and prefixes
in a very simple form are generally used for singular and plural, but the
rest of the concord is very doubtful. Here, however, we have the nearest
relations of the Bantu, so far as [v.03 p.0358] etymology of word-roots is
concerned. Further evidence of slight etymological and even grammatical
relationships may be traced as far west as the lower Niger and northern and
western Gold Coast languages (and, in some word-roots, the Mandingo group).
The Fula language would offer some _grammatical_ resemblance if its
suffixes were turned into prefixes (a change which has actually taken place
in the reverse direction in the English language between its former
Teutonic and its modern Romanized conditions; _cf._ "offset" and "set-off,"
"upstanding" and "standing-up").

The legends and traditions of the Bantu peoples themselves invariably point
to a northern origin, and a period, not wholly removed from their racial
remembrance, when they were strangers in their present lands. Seemingly the
Bantu, somewhat early in their migration down the east coast, took to the
sea, and not merely occupied the islands of Pemba and Zanzibar, but
travelled as far afield as the Comoro archipelago and even the west coast
of Madagascar. Their invasion of Madagascar must have been fairly
considerable in numbers, and they doubtless gave rise to the race of black
people known traditionally to the Hovas as the Va-zimba.

The accompanying map will show pretty accurately the distribution of the
Bantu-speaking Negroes at the present day.

[Illustration]

It will be seen by a glance at this map that the areas in which are spoken
Bantu languages of typical structure and archaic form are somewhat widely
spread. Perhaps on the whole the most archaic dialects at the present day
are those of Mount Elgon, Ruwenzori, Unyoro, Uganda, the north coast of
Tanganyika and of the Bemba country to the south-west of Tanganyika; also
those in the vicinity of Lake Bangweulu, and the Nkonde and Kese dialects
of the north and north-east coasts of Lake Nyasa; also (markedly) the
Subiya speech of the western Zambezi. Another language containing a good
many original Bantu roots and typical features is the well-known Oci-herero
of Damaraland (though this S.W. African group also presents marked
peculiarities and some strange divergencies). Kimakonde, on the east coast
of Africa, is a primitive Bantu tongue; so in its roots, but not in its
prefixes, is the celebrated Ki-swahili of Zanzibar. Ci-bodzo of the Zambezi
delta is also an archaic type of great interest. The Zulu-Kaffir language,
though it exhibits marked changes and deviations in vocabulary and
phonetics (both probably of recent date), preserves a few characteristics
of the hypothetical mother-tongue: so much so that, until the languages of
the Great Lakes came to be known, Zulu-Kaffir was regarded as the most
archaic type of Bantu speech, a position from which it is now completely
deposed. It is in some features unusually divergent from the typical Bantu.

_Classification._--With our present knowledge of the existing Bantu tongues
and their affinities, it is possible to divide them approximately into the
following numbered groups and subdivisions, commencing at the north-eastern
extremity of the Bantu domain, where, on the whole, the languages
approximate nearest to the hypothetical parent speech.

(1) The _Uganda-Unyoro_ group. This includes all the dialects between the
Victoria Nile and Busoga on the east and north, the east coast of Lake
Albert, the range of Ruwenzori and the Congo Forest on the west; on the
south-east and south, the south coast of the Victoria Nyanza, and a line
from near Emin Pasha Gulf to the Malagarazi river and the east coast of
Tanganyika. On the south-west this district is bounded more or less by the
Rusizi river down to Tanganyika. It includes the district of Busoga on the
north-east and all the archipelagoes and inhabited islands of the Victoria
Nyanza even as far east as Bukerebe, except those islands near the
north-east coast. The dialects of Busoga, the Sese Islands and the west
coast of Lake Victoria are closely related to the language of the kingdom
of Uganda. Allied to, yet _quite_ distinct from the Uganda subjection, is
that which is usually classified as _Unyoro_.[5] This includes the dialects
spoken by the Hima (Hamitic aristocracy of these equatorial
lands--_Uru-hima_, _Ru-hinda_, &c.), _Ru-songora_, _Ru-iro_, _Ru-toro_,
_Ru-tusi_, and all the kindred dialects of Karagwe, Busiba, _Ruanda_,
Businja and Bukerebe. _Ki-rundi_, of the Burundi country at the north end
of Tanganyika, and the other languages of eastern Tanganyika down to Ufipa
are closely allied to the Unyoro sub-section of group 1, but perhaps adhere
more closely to group 12. The third independent sub-section of this group
is _Lu-konjo_, the language which is spoken on the southern flanks of the
Ruwenzori Range and thence southwards to Lake Kivu and the eastern limits
of the Congo Forest.

(2) The second group on the geographical list is _Lihuku-Kuamba_, the
separate and somewhat peculiar Bantu dialects lingering in the lands to the
south and south-west of Albert Nyanza (Mboga country). Lihuku (or
Libvanuma) is a very isolated type of Bantu, quite apart from the
Uganda-Unyoro groups, with which it shows no special affinity at all,
though in close juxtaposition. Its alliance with _Kuamba_ of western
Ruwenzori is not very close. Other affinities are with the degraded Bantu
dialects (_Ki-bira_, &c.) of the Ituri-Aruwimi forests. Kuamba is spoken on
the west and north slopes of Ruwenzori. Both Kuamba and Lihuku show a
marked relationship with the languages on the northern Congo and Aruwimi,
less in grammar than in vocabulary.

(3) The _Kavirondo-Masaba_ section. This group, which includes the
_Lu-nyara_, _Luwanga_, _Lukonde_ and _Igizii_ of the north-east and eastern
shores of the Victoria Nyanza and the northern Kavirondo and Mount Elgon
territories, is related to the Luganda section more than to any group of
the Bantu tongues, but it is a very distinct division, in its prefixes the
most archaic. It includes the languages spoken along the western flanks of
Mount Elgon, those of Bantu Kavirondo, and of the eastern coast-lands of
the Victoria Nyanza (Igizii).

(4) The _Kikuyu-Kamba_ group of British East Africa, east of the Rift
valley. It includes, besides the special dialects of Kikuyu and Ukambani,
all the scattered fragments of Bantu speech on Mount Kenya and the upper
Tana river (_Dhaicho_).

(5) The _Kilimanjaro_ (_Chaga-Siha_) group, embracing the rather peculiar
dialects of Mount Kilimanjaro, Mount Meru and Ugweno.

(6) The _Pokomo-Nyika-Giriama-Taveita_ group represents the Bantu dialects
of the coast province of British East Africa, between (and including) the
Tana river on the north and the frontier of German East Africa on the
south.

(7) _Swahili_, the language of Zanzibar and of the opposite coast, a form
of speech now widely spread as a commercial language over Eastern and
Central Africa. Swahili is a somewhat archaic Bantu dialect, indigenous
probably to the East African coast south of the Ruvu (Pangani) river, which
by intermixture with Arabic has become the _lingua franca_ of eastern
Africa between the White Nile and the Zambezi. It was almost certainly of
mainland origin, distinct from the original local dialects of Zanzibar and
Pemba, which may have belonged to group No. 6. There are colonies of
Swahili-speaking people at Mombasa, Malindi, Lamu, and even as far north as
the Shebeli river in Somaliland, also along the coast of German and
Portuguese East Africa as far south as Angoche. In the coast-lands between
the Ruvu or Pangani river on the north and the Kilwa settlements on the
south, the local languages and dialects are more or less related to
Swahili, though they are independent languages. Amongst these may be
mentioned _Bondei_, _Shambala_ (north of the Ruvu), _Nguru_, _Zeguha_,
_Ki-mrima_ and _Ki-zaramo_.

(8) This group might be described as _Kaguru-Sagala-Kami_. It is one which
occupies the inland territories of German East Africa, between the Swahili
coast dialects on the east and the domain of the Nyamwezi (No. 11) on the
west. On the north this group is bounded by the non-Bantu languages of the
Masai, Mbugu and Taturu, and on the south by the Ruaha river. This group
includes _Kigogo_ and _Irangi_.

[v.03 p.0359] (9) The dialects of the Comoro Islands, between the East
African coast and Madagascar, are styled _Hi-nzua_ or _Anzuani_ and
_Shi-ngazija_. They are somewhat closely related to Swahili.

(10) The archaic _Makonde_ or _Mabiha_ of the lower Ruvuma, and the coast
between Lindi and Ibo; this might conceivably be attached to the Swahili
branch.

(11) The _Nyamwezi_ group includes all the dialects of the Nyamwezi country
west of Ugogo as far north as the Victoria Nyanza (where the tongues melt
into group No. 1), and bounded on the south by the Upper Ruaha river, and
on the west by the eastern borderlands of Tanganyika. The Nyamwezi genus
penetrates south-west to within a short distance of Lake Rukwa. A language
of this group was at one time a good deal spoken in the southern part of
the Belgian Congo, having been imported there by traders who made
themselves chiefs.

(12) The _Tanganyika_ languages (_Ki-rega_, _Kabwari_, _Kiguha_, &c). These
dialects are chiefly spoken in the regions west-north-west, and perhaps
north and east of Tanganyika, from the vicinity of Lake Albert Edward on
the north and the Lukuga outlet of Tanganyika on the south. On the west
they are bounded by the Congo Forest and the Manyema genus (No. 13). The
languages on the east coast of Tanganyika (_Ki-rundi_, _Kigeye_, &c.) seem
to be more nearly connected with those of group No. 1 (_Uganda-Unyoro_),
yet perhaps they are more conveniently included here.

(13) The _Manyema_ (_Baenya_) group includes most of the corrupt Bantu
dialects between the western watershed of Tanganyika and the main stream of
the Luapula-Congo, extending also still farther north, and comprising
(seemingly) the languages of the Aruwimi basin, such as _Yalulema_, _Soko_,
_Lokele_, _Kusu_, _Tu-rumbu_, &c. On the west the Manyema group is bounded
by the languages of the Lomami valley, which belong to groups Nos. 15 and
16; on the east the Manyema genus merges into the much purer Bantu dialects
of groups Nos. 1 and 12. An examination of the Lihuku-Kuamba section (No.
2) shows these tongues to be connected with the Manyema group. The _Kibira_
dialects of the north-eastern Congo Forest (Ituri district) may perhaps be
placed in this section.[6]

(14) The _Rua-Luba-Lunda-Marungu_ group (in which are included _Kanyoka_,
_Lulua_ and _Ki-tabwa_) occupies a good deal of the south central basin of
the Congo, between the south-west coast-line of Tanganyika on the east and
the main streams of the Kasai and Kwango on the west, between the Bakuba
country on the north and the Zambezi watershed on the south.

(15) The _Bakuba_ assemblage of Central Congo dialects (_Songe_,
_Shilange_, _Babuma_, &c.) probably includes all the Bantu languages
between the Lomami river on the east and the Kwa-Kasai and Upper Kwilu on
the west. Its boundary on the north is perhaps the Sankuru river.

(16) The _Balolo_ group consists of all the languages of the Northern Congo
bend (bounded on the north, east and west by the main stream of the Congo),
and perhaps the corrupt dialects of the Northern Kasai, Kwilu and Kwango
(_Babuma_, _Bahuana_, _Bambala_, _Ba-yaka_, _Bakutu_, &c.), where these are
not nearer allied to Teke (No. 18) or to _Bakuba_.

(17) The _Bangala-Bobangi-Liboko_ group comprises the commercial languages
of the Upper Congo (_Ngala_, _Bangi_, _Liboko_, _Poto_, _Ngombe_, _Yanzi_,
&c.) and all the known Congo dialects along and to the north and sometimes
south of the main stream, from as far west as the junction of the Sanga to
as far east as the Rubi and Lomami rivers, and those between the Congo and
the Lower Ubangi river and up the Ubangi, as far north as the limits of the
Bantu domain (about 3° 30' N.). Allied to these perhaps are the
scarcely-known forms of speech in the basin of the Sanga river, besides the
"Ba-yanzi" dialects of Lakes Mantumba and Leopold II.

(18) The _Bateke_ (_Batio_) group. This may be taken roughly to include
most of the Bantu dialects west of the Sanga river, northwest of the Lower
Congo, south of the Upper Ogowe and Ngoko rivers and east of the Atlantic
coast-lands.

(19) The _Di-Kele_ and _Benga_ dialects of Spanish Guinea and the Batanga
coast of German Cameroon.

(20) The _Fañ_ or _Pangwe_ forms of speech (so corrupt as to be only just
recognizable as Bantu), which occupy the little-known interior of German
Cameroon and French Gabun, down to the Ogowe, and as far east and north as
the Sañga, Sanagá and Mbam rivers, and the immediate hinterland of the
"Duala" Cameroon.

(21) The _Duala_ group, which on the other hand is of a much purer Bantu
type, includes the languages spoken on the estuary and delta of the
Cameroon river.

(22) The _Isubu-Bakwiri_ group of the coast-lands north of Cameroon delta
(Ambas Bay), and on the west slopes of Cameroon Mts.

(23) The Bantu dialects of _Fernando Pô_ (_Ediya_, _Bateti_, _Bani_, &c.)
distantly allied to Nos 24, 2 and 13.

(24) The _Barondo-Bakundu_ group, which begins on the north at the Rio del
Rey on the extremity of the Bantu field, near the estuary of the Cross
river. This group may also include _Barombi_ and _Bas[=a]_, _Boñkeñ_,
_Abo_, _Nkosi_ and other much-debased dialects, which are spoken on the
eastern slopes of the Cameroon mountains and on the Cameroon river
(Magombe), and thence to the Sanagá and Nyong rivers. Eastwards and
north-eastwards of this group, the languages (such as _Mbe_, _Bati_, _Nki_,
_Mbudikum_, _Bafut_, _Bayoñ_) may be described as "semi-Bantu," and
evincing affinities with the forms of speech in the basin of the Central
Benue river and also with the _Fañ_ (No. 20).

(25) Turning southwards again from the north-westernmost limit of the
Bantu, we meet with another group, the _Mpongwe-Orungu_ and _Aduma_
languages of French Gabun, and the tongues of the Lower Ogowe and Fernan
Vaz promontory.

(26) These again shade on the south into the group of _Kakongo_ dialects of
the Loango and Sete Kama coast--such as _Ba-kama_, _Ba-nyanga_, _Ma-yombe_,
_Ba-vili_, _Ba-kamba_ and _Ka-kongo_ (_Kabinda_).

(27) The _Kongo_ language group comprises the dialects along the lower
course of the Congo from its mouth to Stanley Pool; also the territory of
the old kingdom of Congo, lying to the south of that river (and north of
the river Loje) from the coast eastwards to the watershed of the river
Kwango (and the longitude, more or less, of Stanley Pool).

(28) In the south the Kongo dialects melt imperceptibly into the
closely-allied Angola language. This group may be styled in a general way
_Mbundu_, and it includes the languages of Central Angola, such as
_Ki-mbundu_, _Mbamba_, _Ki-sama_, _Songo_, _U-mbangala_. The boundary of
this genus on the east is probably the Kwango river, beyond which the Lunda
languages begin (No. 14). On the north, the river Loje to some extent
serves as a frontier between the _Kongo_ and _Mbundu_ tongues. On the south
the boundary of group No. 28 is approximately the 11th degree of south
latitude.

(29) Very distinct from the _Ki-mbundu_ speech (though with connecting
forms) is the _Oci-herero_ group, which includes the _Herero_ language of
Damaraland, the _Umbundu_ of the Bihe highlands of south Angola, the _Nano_
of the Benguela coast, and _Si-ndonga_, _Ku-anyama_ and _Oci-mbo_ of the
southern regions of Portuguese Angola and the northern half of German
South-West Africa. The languages of group No. 29 probably extend as far
inland as the Kwito and Kubango rivers, in short, to the Zambezi watershed.
On the south they are confronted with the Hottentot languages. The Haukoin
or Hill Damaras--a Negro race of unexplained affinities and apparently
speaking a Hottentot language--occupy an enclave in the area of _Herero_
speech.

(30) What may be called the _Kiboko_ or _Kibokwe_ (also _Kioko_) family of
eastern Angola is a language-group which seems to offer affinities to the
languages of the Upper Zambezi and to those of groups Nos. 28 and 29. It
extends eastwards into the south-western portion of the Belgian Congo, and
includes the _Lubale_ of northern Barotseland and the sources of the river
Zambezi, and possibly the _Gangela_ of south-western Angola.

(31) Southwards of group No. 30 is that of the _Barotseland_ languages, of
which the best-known form--almost the only one that is effectively
illustrated--is _Si-luyi_. To _Si-luyi_ may be related the _Mabunda_ of
Western Barotseland. The dialects of the _Ambwela_, _A-mbwe_, _Ma-bukushu_
and _A-kwamashi_ are probably closely related.

(32) Next is a group which might be styled the _Subiya-Tonga-Ila_, though
some authorities think that _Tonga_ and _Ila_ deserve to be ranked as an
independent group. There is, however, a close alliance in structure between
the languages of each of the two subsections. The _Tonga_ subgroup would
include the dialects of the _Ba-tetela_, the _Ba-ila_ (_Mashukulumbwe_) and
of all Central Zambezia. _Ci-subiya_ is the dominant language of South-West
Zambezia, along a portion of the Zambezi river south of Barotseland, and in
the lands lying between the Zambezi and the Chobe-Linyante river. _Subiya_
is one of the most archaic of Bantu languages, more so than _Tonga_. Both
are without any strong affinity to _Oci-herero_, and only evince a _slight_
relationship with the Zulu group (No. 44).

(33) The _Bisa_ or _Wisa_ family includes the languages of Iramba, Bausi,
Lukinga, in the southernmost projection of the Belgian Congo, and the
dialects of _Lubisa_ and _Ilala_ between the Chambezi river and Lake
Bangweulu on the north, and the Luangwa river on the east and south;
perhaps also some of the languages along the course of the Upper Luapula
river.

(34) With it is closely allied that of the _Bemba_ or _Emba_ dialects. This
interesting genus occupies the ground between the south-west and south
coasts of Tanganyika, Lake Mweru, and the Upper Chambezi river. The
_Ki-bemba_ domain may be taken to include the locally-modified _Ki-lungu_
and _Ki-mambwe_ of South and South-East Tanganyika.

(35) What may be called the _North Nyasa_ or _Nkonde_ group comprises all
the dialects of the north-west and north coasts of Lake Nyasa (such as
_Ici-wandia_ and _Iki-nyikiusa_) and _Ishi-nyi[chi]a_ of the
Nyasa-Tanganyika plateau, and extends perhaps as far north west as the Fipa
country (_Iki-fipa_), and the shores of Lake Rukwa (_Ici-wungu_) in the
vicinity of the Nyamwezi domain (No. 11). _Iki-fipa_, however, has some
affinities to the Tanganyika and western Victoria-Nyanza languages (groups
Nos. 1 and 12).

[v.03 p.0360] (36) The western part of Nyasaland, south of group No. 35, is
occupied by the _Tumbuka_ section, which includes the languages of the
_Tumbuka_, _Henga_ and _A-tonga_ peoples, and occupies the area between the
western shores of Lake Nyasa and the Upper Luangwa river.

(37) Eastwards of No. 35 (North Nyasa group) lies the _Kinga_ speech of the
lofty Livingstone mountains, which is sufficiently distinct from its
neighbours to be classified as a separate group.

(38) East of the Livingstone mountains and west of the Ruaha river, south
also of the Unyamwezi domain, extends the _Sango-Bena-Hehe-Sutu_ group.

(39) The extensive _Yao_ genus of languages stretches from just behind the
coast of the Lindi settlements in German East Africa (_Ki-mwera_)
south-westward across the Ruvuma river to the north-east shores of Lake
Nyasa (_Ki-kese_), and thence back to the valley of the Lujenda-Ruvuma
(_Cingindo_), and southwards in various dialects of the _Yao_ language to
the south-east corner of Lake Nyasa and the region east of the Shire river,
between Lake Nyasa, the Shire highlands and Mt. Mlanje. It is only since
the middle of the 19th century that the _Yao_ language has conquered
territory to the south of Lake Nyasa. There still remain within its domain
colonies of Nyanja-speaking people.

(40) Eastwards of the _Yao_ domain, and bounded on the north by the range
of that language in the Ruvuma valley and by the separate group of
_Ki-makonde_ (No. 10), ranges the well-marked _Makua_ genus. The languages
thus described occupy the greater part of Portuguese East Africa away from
the watershed of Lake Nyasa. The _Makua_ language is probably divided into
the following dialects:--_I-medo_, _I-lomwe_, _I-tugulu_ and _Anguru_.
There are other dialects unnamed in the Angoji coast-region, where,
however, strong colonies of Swahili-speaking people are settled. The
southern part of the _Makua_ domain is occupied by the _Ci-cuambo_ of the
Quelimane district.

(41) _Nyanja_, perhaps the most extensive group of cognate languages in the
Bantu field, is principally associated with the east and west shores of the
southern half of Lake Nyasa. It also covers all the valley of the Shire,
except portions of the Shire highlands, down to the junction of that stream
with the Zambezi, and further, the lands on both banks of the Zambezi down
to and including its delta. West of Lake Nyasa, the _Nyanja_ domain extends
in the _Senga_ language to the river Luangwa and the Central Zambezi, also
along both banks of the Central Zambezi. South of the Central Zambezi,
_Nyanja_ dialects are spoken as far west as the Victoria Falls. Thence they
extend eastwards over Mashonaland to the sea-coast. With this family may
also be associated the languages of the Portuguese coast-region south of
the Zambezi as far as Inhambane. The principal dialects of the _Nyanja_
language are the _Cinyanja_ of Eastern Nyasaland, _Ci-peta_ and _Ci-maravi_
of South-West Nyasaland to as far as the watershed of the Luangwa river,
the _Ci-mañanja_ of the Shire highlands, _Ci-mobo_ and _Ci-machinjiri_ of
the Shire valley, _Ci-sena_ or _Ci-nyungwe_ of Tete and Sena (Zambezi), and
_Ci-mazaro_ of the Lower Zambezi. The Luangwa regions, as already
mentioned, are occupied by the distinct but closely-allied Senga language.
South of the Central Zambezi there are _Ci-nanzwa_ in the region near the
Victoria Falls, _Ci-nyai_, _Shi-kalaña_, _Ci-shuna_ (_Ci-gomo_), _Ci-loze_,
and possibly _Ci-shangwe_ (or _Ci-hlangane_) and _Shi-lenge_ which link on
to the Beira coast dialects. In the delta of the Zambezi is to be found
_Ci-podzo_, a very distinct language, yet one which belongs to the _Nyanja_
genus. _Ci-shangane_, _Chopi_ or _Shi-lenge_ and other dialects of the
Beira and Inhambane coast-lands and of Manika have been much influenced by
Zulu dialects (_Tebele_ and _Ronga_).

(42) The well-marked _Bechuana_ language group has very distinct features
of its own. This includes all the Bantu dialects of the Bechuanaland
protectorate west of the Guai river. Bechuana dialects (such as _Ci-venda_,
_Se-suto_, _Se-peli_, _Se-roloñ_, _Se-[chi]lapi_, &c.) cover a good deal of
the north and west of the Transvaal, and extend over all the Orange River
Colony and Bechuanaland. _Se-suto_ is the language of Basutoland;
_Se-rolon_, _Se-mangwato_, of the Eastern Kalahri; _Se-kololo_ is the court
language of Barotseland; _Ci-venda_ and _Se-pedi_ or _Peli_ are the
principal dialects of the Transvaal. Group No. 42, in fact, stretches
between the Zambezi on the north and the Orange river on the south, and
extends westward (except for Hottentot and Bushmen interruptions) to the
domain of the _Oci-herero_.

(43) The _Ronga_ (_Tonga_) languages of Portuguese South-East Africa
(Gazaland, Lower Limpopo valley, and patches of the North Transvaal
(_Shi-gwamba_), Delagoa Bay) are almost equally related to the _Nyanja_
group (41) on the one hand, and to _Zulu_ on the other, probably
representing a mingling of the two influences, of which the latter
predominates.

(44) Lastly comes the _Zulu-Kaffir_ group, occupying parts of Rhodesia, the
eastern portion of the Transvaal, Swaziland, Natal and the eastern half of
Cape Colony. In vocabulary, and to some degree in phonetics, the Zulu
language (divided at most into three dialects) is related in some phonetic
features to No. 42, and of course to No. 43; otherwise it stands very much
alone in its developments. It may have distant relations in groups Nos. 29
and 32. Dialects of Zulu (_Tebele_ and _Ki-ngoni_ or _Ci-nongi_) are spoken
at the present day in South-West Rhodesia and in Western Nyasaland and on
the plateaus north-east of Lake Nyasa, carried thither by the Zulu raiders
of the early 19th century.

The foregoing is only an attempt to classify the known forms of Bantu
speech and to give their approximate geographical limits. The writer is
well aware that here and there exist small patches of languages spoken by
two or three villages which, though emphatically Bantu, possess isolated
characters making them not easily included within any of the
above-mentioned groups; but too detailed a reference to these languages
would be wearisome and perhaps puzzling. Broadly speaking, the domain of
Bantu speech seems to be divided into four great sections:--(a) the
languages of the Great Lakes and the East Coast down to and including the
Zambezi basin; (b) the South-Central group (_Bechuana-Zulu_); (c) the
languages of the South-West, from the southern part of the Belgian Congo to
Damaraland and the Angola-Congo coast; and (d) the Western group, including
all the Central and Northern Congo and Cameroon languages, and probably
also group No. 2 of the Albert Nyanza and Semliki river.

_Common Features_.--There is no mistaking a Bantu language, which perhaps
is what renders the study of this group so interesting and encouraging. The
homogeneity of this family is so striking, as compared with the
inexplicable confusion of tongues which reigns in Africa north of the Bantu
borderland, that the close relationships of these dialects have perhaps
been a little exaggerated by earlier writers.

The phonology of the Western group (d) is akin to that of the Negro
languages of Western and West-Central Africa. A small portion of (b) the
South-Central group (_Zulu_) has picked up clicks, perhaps borrowed from
the Hottentots and Bushmen. Otherwise, the three groups (a), (b) and (c)
are closely related in phonology, and never, except here and there on the
borders of the Western group, adopt the peculiar West African combinations
of _kp_ and _gb_, which are so characteristic of African speech between the
Upper Nile and the Guinea coast.

The following propositions may be laid down to define the special or
peculiar features of the Bantu languages:--

(1) They are agglutinative in their construction, the syntax being formed
by adding prefixes principally and also suffixes to the root, but no
infixes (that is to say, no mutable syllable incorporated into the middle
of the root-word).[7] (2) The root excepting its terminal vowel is
practically unchanging, though its first or penultimate vowel or consonant
may be modified in pronunciation by the preceding prefix, or the last vowel
in the same way by the succeeding suffix.

(3) The vowels of the Bantu languages are always of the Italian type, and
no true Bantu language includes obscure sounds like _ö_ and _ü_. Each word
must end in a vowel (though in some modern dialects in Eastern Equatorial,
West and South Africa the terminal vowel may be elided in rapid
pronunciation, or be dropped, or absorbed in the terminal consonant,
generally a nasal). No two consonants can come together without an
intervening vowel, except in the case of a nasal, labial or sibilant.[8] No
consonant is doubled. Apparent exceptions occur to this last rule where two
nasals, two _r_'s or two _d_'s come together through the elision of a vowel
or a labial.

(4) Substantives are divided into classes or genders, indicated by the
pronominal particle prefixed to the root. These prefixes are used either in
a singular or in a plural sense. With the exception of the "abstract"
prefix _Bu_ (No. 14), no singular prefix can be used as a plural nor vice
versa. There is a certain degree of correspondence between the singular and
plural prefixes (thus No. 2 prefix serves almost invariably as a plural to
No. 3; No. 8 corresponds as a plural to No. 7). The number of prefixes
common to the whole group is perhaps sixteen. The pronominal particle or
prefix of the noun is attached as a prefix to the roots of the adjectives,
pronouns, prepositions and verbs of the sentence which are connected with
the governing noun; and though in course of time these particles may differ
in form from the prefix of the substantive, they were akin in origin. (This
system is the "concord" of Dr Bleek.[9]) The pronominal particles, whether
in nominative or accusative case, must always precede the nominal,
pronominal, adjectival and verbal roots, though they often follow the
auxiliary prefix-participles used in conjugating verbs,[10] and the roots
of some prepositions.

[v.03 p.0361]

(5) The root of the verb is the second person singular of the imperative.

(6) No _sexual gender_ is recognized in the _pronouns_ and _concord_.
Sexual gender may be indicated by a male "prefix" of varying form, often
identical with a word meaning "father," while there is a feminine prefix,
_na_ or _nya_, connected with the root meaning "mother," or a suffix _ka_
or _kazi_, indicating "wife," "female." The 1st and 2nd prefixes invariably
indicate living beings and are Usually restricted to humanity.

The sixteen original prefixes of the Bantu languages are given below in the
most archaic forms to be found at the present day. The still older types of
these prefixes met with in one or two languages, and deduced generally by
the other forms of the particle used in the syntax, are given in brackets.
It is possible that some of these prefixes resulted from the combination of
a demonstrative pronoun and a prefix indicating quality or number.

                       _Old Bantu Prefixes._

      Singular.                                     Plural.

  Class  1. Umu- (Ñgu-mu-).[11]       Class  2. Aba (Mba-ba or Ñga-ba).[11]
    "    3. Umu- (Ñgu-mu-).            "    4. Imi- (Ñgi-mi-).
    "    5. Idi (Ndi-di-).             "    6. Ama- (Ñga-ma-).
    "    7. Iki- (Ñki-ki-).            "    8. Ibi- (Mbi-bi-).
    "    9. I-n- or I-ni- (?Ngi-ni-).  "   10. Iti-, Izi-, Iti-n-, Izi-n-
                                               (?Ñgi-ti-).
    "   11. Ulu (Ndu-du-).             "   12. Utu (?Ntu-tu-);
                                               often diminutive in sense.
    "   13. Aka (?Nka-ka-); usually diminutive, sometimes honorific.
    "   14. Ubu- (?Mbu-bu-); sometimes used in a plural sense;
            generally employed to indicate abstract nouns.
    "   15. Uku (?Ñku-ku-); identical with the preposition "to,"
            used as an infinitive with verbs, but also with
            certain nouns indicating primarily functions of the body.
    "   16. Apa (Mpa-pa-); locative; applied to nouns and other
            forms of speech to indicate place or position;
            identical with the adverb "here," as Ku- is with "there."

To these sixteen prefixes, the use of which is practically common to all
members of the family, might perhaps be added No. 17, _Fi-_ or _Vi-_, a
prefix in the singular number, having a diminutive sense, which is found in
some of the western and north-western Bantu tongues, chiefly in the
northern half of the Congo basin and Cameroon. It is represented as far
east (in the form of _I-_) as the Manyema language on the Upper Congo, near
Tanganyika. This prefix cannot be traced to derivation from any others
among the sixteen, certainly not to No. 8, as it is always used in the
singular. Its corresponding _plural_ prefix is No. 12 (_Tu-_). Prefix No.
18 is _Ogu-_, which has, as a plural prefix, No. 19, _Aga-_. These are both
used in an augmentative sense, and their use seems to be confined to the
Luganda and Masaba dialects, and perhaps some branches of the Unyoro
language. These, like No. 17, are regular prefixes, since they are supplied
with the concord (_-gu-_ and _-ga-_). Lastly, there is the 20th prefix,
_Mu-_, which is really a preposition meaning "in" or "into," often combined
in meaning with another particle, _-ni_, used always as a suffix.[12] The
20th prefix, _Mu-_, however, does not seem to have a complete concord, as
it is only used adjectivally or as a preposition and has no pronominal
accusative.

The concord may be explained thus:--Let us for a moment reconstruct the
original Bantu mother-tongue (as attempts are sometimes made to deduce the
ancient Aryan from a comparison of the most archaic of its daughters) and
propound sentences to illustrate the repetition of pronominal particles
known as the concord.

                              _Old Bantu._
    _Babo_     _mbaba_-ntu[13]    _ba_bi      _ba-bo_-ta     tu-_ba_-oga.
    They     these-they person   they bad   they who kill   we fear them.
  Rendered into the modern dialect of _Luganda_ this would be:--
    _Bo_        _aba_-ntu        _ba_-bi     _ba_bota       tu-_ba_-tia.
    They     these-they person   they bad   they who kill   we them fear.
              (They are bad people who kill; we fear them.)

                              _Old Bantu._
    _Ñgu-mu_-ti   _ñg_uno     _ñgu_-gwa      ku-_ñgu_-mbona.
    This tree     this here   this falls;    thou this seest?
  Rendered into _Kiguha_ of North-West Tanganyika, this would be:--
    _U_m_u_ti     _gu_no      _gu_gwa          u_gu_mona?
    It tree       this here   it falls;      thou it seest?
             (The tree falls; dost thou see it?)

The prefixes and their corresponding particles have varied greatly in form
from the original syllables, as the various Bantu dialects became more and
more corrupt. Assuming these prefixes to have consisted once of two
distinct particles, such as, for example, Nos. 1 and 3, _Ñgu-mu-_, or the
6th plural prefix _Nga-ma-_, the first syllable seems to have been of the
nature of a demonstrative pronoun, and the second more like a numeral or an
adjective. _Mu-_ probably meant "one," and _Ma-_ a collective numeral of
indefinite number, applied to liquids (especially water), a tribe of men, a
herd of beasts--anything in the mass.[14] In the corresponding particles of
the concord as applied to adjectives, verbs and pronouns, sometimes the
first syllable, _Ñgu_ or _Ñga_ was taken for the concord and sometimes the
second _mu_ or _ma_. This would account for the seemingly inexplicable lack
of correspondence between the modern prefix and its accompanying particle,
which so much puzzled Bleek and other early writers on the Bantu languages.
In many of these tongues, for example, the particle which corresponds at
the present day to the plural prefix _Ma-_ is not always _Ma_, but more
often _Ga-_, _Ya-_, _A-_; while to _Mu-_ (Classes 1 and 3) the
corresponding particle besides _-mu-_ is _gu-_, _gw-_, _u-_, _wu-_, _yu-_,
_ñ-_, &c.

The second prefix. _Ba-_ or _Aba-_, is, in the most archaic Bantu speech
(the languages of Mt. Elgon), _Baba-_ in its definite form (_Ñgaba_
sometimes in Zulu-Kaffir). The concord is _-ba-_ in all the less corrupt
Bantu tongues, but this plural prefix degenerates into _Va-_, _Wa-_, _Ma-_,
and _A-_. The concord of the 4th prefix, _Mi-_, is _gi-_, _-i-_, _-ji-_,
and sometimes _-mi-_. The commonest form of the 5th prefix at the present
day is _Li-_ (the older and more correct is _Di-_), and its concord is the
same; this 5th prefix is often dropped (the concord remaining) or becomes
_Ri-_, _I-_, _Ji-_, and _Ni-_. The 7th prefix, _Ki-_, in many non-related
dialects pursues a parallel course through _Ci-_ into _Si-_ (=_Shi_) and
_Si-_ and its concord resembles it. The 8th prefix is still more variable.
In its oldest form this is _Ibi-_ or _Mbibi-_. It is invariably the plural
of the 7th. It becomes in different forms of Bantu speech _Vi-_, _Pi-_,
_Fi-_, _Fy-_, _P[vs]i-_, _[vS]i-_, _I-_, _By-_, _Bzi-_, _Psi-_, _Zwi-_,
_Zi-_ and _Ri-_, with a concord that is similar. The 10th prefix, which was
originally _Ti-_ or _Tin-_, or _Zi-_ or _Zin-_, becomes _Jin-_, _Rin-_,
_Din-_, _Lin-_, [theta]_in-_, [theta]_on-_. &c. The _n_ in this prefix is
really the singular prefix No. 9, which is sometimes retained in the
plural, and sometimes omitted. In the case of the 10th prefix, the concord
or corresponding pronoun persists long after the prefix has fallen out of
use as a definite article. Thus, though it is absent as a plural prefix for
nouns in the _Swahili_ of Zanzibar, it reappears in the concord. For
instance:--_Ñombe hizi zangu_--Cows these mine (These cows are mine),
although _Ñombe_ has ceased to be _ziñombe_ in the plural, the _Zi-_
particle reappears in _hizi_ and _zangu_. In fact, the persistence of this
concord, which exists in almost every known Bantu language in connexion
with the 10th prefix, shows that prefix to have been in universal use at
one time. The 11th prefix _-Lu-_ seems to be descended from an older form,
_Ndu-_. Its commonest type is _Lu-_, but it sometimes loses the _L_ and
becomes _U-_, and in the more archaic dialects is usually pronounced _Du-_
or _Ru-_. It is also _Nu-_ in one or two languages. The 12th prefix
(_Tu-_), always used in a diminutive sense, disappears in many of these
languages. Where met with it is generally _Tu-_ or _To-_, but sometimes the
initial _T_ becomes _R_ (_Ru-_, _Ro-_) or _L_ (_Lu-_, _Lo-_) or even _Y_
(_Yo-_), the concord following the fortunes of the prefix. The 13th prefix
(_Ka-_) is sometimes confused with the 7th (_Ki_) and merged into it and
vice versa. _Ka-_ very often takes the 8th prefix as a plural, more
commonly the 12th, sometimes the 14th. This prefix (_Ka-_) entirely
disappears in the north-western section of the Bantu languages. Bleek
thought that it persisted in the attenuated form of _E-_ so characteristic
of the Cameroon and northern Congo languages, but later investigations show
this _E-_ to be a reduction of _Ki-_ (_Ke-_) the 7th prefix. The 14th
prefix _Bu-_ is very persistent, but frequently loses its initial letter
_B_, which is either softened into _V_ or _W_, or disappears altogether,
the prefix becoming _U-_ or _O-_ or _Ow-_. Sometimes this prefix becomes
palatized into _By-_ or even _T[vs]-_ (_C-_). The concord follows suit. The
15th prefix, _Ku-_, occasionally loses its initial _K_ or softens into _Hu_
or [Greek: chu] or strengthens into _Gu_. Its concord under these
circumstances sometimes remains in the form of _Ku-_. The 16th, _Pa-_,
prefix is one of the most puzzling in its distribution and its phonetic
changes. A very large number of the Bantu languages in the north, east and
west have a dislike to the consonant P, which they frequently transmute
into an aspirate (_H_), or soften into _V_, _W_, or _F_, or simply drop
out. There is too much evidence in favour of this prefix having been
originally _Pa-_ or _Mpa-pa_ to enable us to give it any other form in
reconstructing the Bantu mother-tongue. Yet in the most archaic Bantu
dialects to the north of the Victoria Nyanza it is nowhere found in the
form of _Pa-_. It is either _Ha-_ (and _Ha-_ changes eastward into _Sa-_!)
or _Wa-_.[15] But for its existence in this shape in the language of Uganda
one might almost be led to think that the 16th locative prefix began as
_Ha-_, and by some process without a parallel changed in the east and south
to the form of _Pa-_. There are, however, a good many place names in the
northern part of the Uganda protectorate, in the region now occupied by
Nilotic negroes, which begin with _Pa-_. These place names would seem to be
of ancient Bantu origin in a [v.03 p.0362] land from which the Bantu
negroes were subsequently driven by Nilotic invaders from the north. They
may be relics therefore of a time before the _Pa-_ prefix of those regions
had changed to the modern form of _Ha-_. In S.W. and N.W. Cameroon the
initial _p_ of the 16th prefix reappears in two or three dialects; but
elsewhere in North-West Bantu Africa and in the whole basin of the Congo,
except the extreme south and south-east, the form _Pa-_ is never met with;
it is _Va-_, _Wa-_, _Ha-_, _Fa-_, or _A-_. In the _Secuana_ group of
dialects it is _Fa-_ or _Ha-_; in the Luyi language of Barotseland it
assumes the very rare form of _Ba-_, while the first prefix is weakened to
_A-_.

The pronouns in Bantu are in most cases traceable to some such general
forms as these:--

  I, me, my .....................ñgi, mi,[16] ñgu.

  Thou, thee, thy................gwe, ku; -ko.

  He or she, him, her, his, &c...a-, ya-, wa- (nom.); also ñgu-
                                 (which becomes yu-, ye-, wu-,
                                 hu-, u-); -mu (acc.); -ka,
                                 -kwe (poss.); there is also
                                 another form, ndi (nom. and
                                 poss.) in the Western Bantu
                                 sphere.

  We, us, our....................isu, swi-, tu-, ti-; -tu- (acc.);
                                 -itu (poss.).

  Ye, you, your..................inu, mu-, nyu-, nyi-, -ni;
                                 -nu, -mu- (acc.); -inu
                                 (poss.).

  They, them, their..............babo, ba-; -ba- (acc.); -babo
                                 (poss.).

The Bantu verb consists of a practically unchangeable root which is
employed as the second person singular of the imperative. To this root are
prefixed and suffixed various particles. These are worn-down verbs which
have become auxiliaries or they are reduced adverbs or prepositions. It is
probable (with one exception) that the building up of the verbal root into
moods and tenses has taken place independently in the principal groups of
Bantu languages, the arrangement followed being probably founded on a
fundamental system common to the original Bantu tongue. The exception
alluded to may be a method of forming the preterite tense, which seems to
be shared by a great number of widely-spread Bantu languages. This may be
illustrated by the Zulu _tanda_, love, which changes to _tandile_, have
loved, did love. This _-ile_ or _-ili_ may become in other forms _-idi_,
_didi_, _-ire_, _-ine_, but is always referable back to some form like
_-ili_ or _ile_, which is probably connected with the root _li_ or _di_
(_ndi_ or _ni_), which means "to be" or "exist." The initial _i_ in the
particle _-ile_ often affects the last or penultimate syllable of the
verbal root, thereby causing one of the very rare changes which take place
in this vocable. In many Bantu dialects the root _pa_ (which means to give)
becomes _pele_ in the preterite (no doubt from an original _pa-ile_).
Likewise the Zulu _tandile_ is a contraction of _tanda-ile_.

Two other frequent changes of the terminal vowel of the common root are
those from _a_ (which is almost invariably the terminal vowel of Bantu
verbs), (1), into _e_ to form the subjunctive tense, (2) into _i_ to give a
negative sense in certain tenses. With these exceptions the vowel _a_
almost invariably terminates verbal roots. The departures from this rule
are so rare that it might almost be included among the elementary
propositions determining the Bantu languages. And these instances when they
occur are generally due (as in Swahili) to borrowed foreign words (Arabic,
Portuguese or English).[17] This point of the terminal _a_ is the more
interesting because, by changing the terminal vowel of the verbal root and
possibly adding a personal prefix, one can make nouns from verbs. Thus in
Luganda _senyua_ is the verbal root for "to pardon." "A pardon" or
"forgiveness" is _ki-senyuo_. "A pardoner" might be _mu-senyui_. In Swahili
_patani[vs]a_ would be the verbal root for "conciliate"; _mpatana[vs]i_ is
a "conciliator," and _upatani[vs]o_ is "conciliation." Another marked
feature of Bantu verbs is their power of modifying the sense of the
original verbal root by suffixes, the affixion of which modifies the
terminal vowel and sometimes the preceding consonant of the root. Familiar
forms of these variations and their usual meanings are as follows:--

Supposing an original Bantu root, _tanda_, to love; this may become

  _tandwa_ . . . . . . . . . . to be loved.
  _tandeka_ or _tandika_ . . . to be lovable.
  _tandila_ or _tandela_[18] . to love for, with, or by some other person.
  _tandiza_ (or _-eza_)     \  to cause to love.
  _tandisa_ (or _-esa_)[19] /  to cause to love.
  _tandana_  . . . . . . . . . to love reciprocally.

The suffix _-aka_ or _-añga_ sometimes appears and gives a sense of
continuance to the verbal root. Thus _tanda_ may become _tandaka_ in the
sense of "to continue loving."[20]

The negative verbal particle in the Bantu languages may be traced back to
an original _ka_, _ta_ or _sa_, _ki_, _ti_ or _si_ in the Bantu
mother-tongue. Apparently in the parent language this particle had already
these alternative forms, which resemble those in some West African Negro
languages. In the vast majority of the Bantu dialects at the present day,
the negative particle in the verb (which nearly always coalesces with the
pronominal particle) is descended from this _ka_, _ta_ or _sa_, _ki_, _ti_
or _si_, assuming the forms of _ka_, _ga_, _ñga_, _sa_, _ta_, _ha_, _a_,
_ti_, _si_, _hi_, &c. It has coalesced to such an extent in some cases with
the pronominal particle that the two are no longer soluble, and it is only
by the existence of some intermediate forms (as in the _Kongo_ language)
that we are able to guess at the original separation between the two.
Originally the negative particle _ka_, _sa_, &c., was joined to the
pronominal particles, thus:--

  _Ka-ngi_ .................... not I.
    (Therefore _Ka-ngi tanda_ = not I love.)
  _Ka-ku_ or _ka-wu_ .......... not thou.
  _Ka-a_ ...................... not he, she.
  _Ka-tu_ ..................... not we.
  _Ka-nu_ ..................... not ye.
  _Ka-ba_ ..................... not they.

In like manner _sa_ would become _sa-ngi_, _sa-wu_, &c. But very early in
the history of Bantu languages _ka-ngi_, or _sa-ngi_, became contracted
into _kai_, _sai_, and finally, _ki_, _si_; _ka-ku_ or _ka-wu_ into _ku_;
and _kaa_ or _saa_ have always been _ka_ or _sa_. Sometimes in the modern
languages the negative particle (such as _ti_ or _si_) is used without any
vestige of a pronoun being attached to it, and is applied indifferently to
all the persons. Occasionally this particle has fallen out of use, and the
negative is expressed (1) by stress or accent; (2) by suffix (traceable to
a root _-pe_ or _-ko_) answering to the French _pas_, and having the same
sense; and (3) by the separate employment of an adverb. If not a few Bantu
languages, the verb used in a negative sense changes its terminal _-a_ to
_-i_. The subjunctive is very frequently formed by changing the terminal
_-a_ to _-e_: thus, tanda = love; -tand_e_ = may love.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--_A Comparative Grammar of South African Languages_ (in two
parts, left unfinished), by Dr W. I. Bleek (London, 1869); _A Sketch of the
Modern Languages of Africa_, by R. N. Cust (1882); _Comparative Grammar of
the South African Bantu Languages_, by Father J. Torrend (1894; mainly
composed on a study of the languages of the Central Zambezi, interesting,
but erroneous in some deductions, and incomplete). In Sir H. H. Johnston's
_The Kilimanjaro Expedition_ (1884), _British Central Africa_ (1898), and
_The Uganda Protectorate_ (1902-1904), there are illustrative vocabularies;
and in _George Grenfell and the Congo_ (1908) the Congo groups of Bantu
speech are carefully classified, also the Fernandian and Cameroon. In the
numerous essays of Carl Meinhof on the original structure of the Bantu
mother-speech, and on existing languages in East and South-East Africa, in
the _Mittheilungen des Seminärs für Orientalische Sprachen_, Berlin (also
issued separately through Brockhaus, Leipzig, 1899), and also in his
_Grundzüge einer vergleichenden Grammatik der Bantusprachen_ (Berlin,
1906), a vast amount of valuable information has been collected, but
Meinhof's deductions therefrom are not in every case in accord with those
of other authorities. The _Swahili-English Dictionary_, by Dr L. Krapf
(London, 1882), contains a mass of not well-sorted but invaluable
information concerning the Swahili language as spoken on the coast of East
Africa, especially regarding many words now becoming obsolete. A similar
mine of information is to be found in _An Encyclopaedic Dictionary of the
Manañja_ (Mang'anja) _Language of British Central Africa_, by the Rev.
D. C. Scott (1891). Other admirable works are the _Dictionary of the Congo
Language_, by the Rev. Holman Bentley (1891), and _The Folklore of Angola_,
and a _Grammar of Kimbundu_, by Dr. Heli Chatelain. The many handbooks and
vocabularies written and published by Bishop Steere on the languages of the
East African coast-lands are of great importance to the student, especially
as they give forms of the prefixes now passing out of use. The
_Introductory Handbook of the Yao Language_, by the Rev. Alexander
Hetherwick, illustrates very fully that peculiar and important member of
the East African group. Vocabularies of various Congo languages have been
compiled by Dr. A. Sims; more important works on this subject have been
published by the Rev. W. H. Stapleton (_Comparative Handbook of Congo
Languages_), and by Rev. John Whitehead (_Grammar and Dictionary of the
Bobangi Language_ (London, 1899). E. Torday has illustrated the languages
of the Western Congo basin (_Kwango_, _Kwilu_, northern _Kasai_) in the
_Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute_. There is a treatise on
the _Lunda_ language of the southwestern part of the Belgian Congo, in
Portuguese, by Henrique de Carvalho, who also in his _Ethnographia da
Expedicaõ portugueza [v.03 p.0363] ao Muata Yanvo_ goes deeply into Bantu
language questions. The _Duala_ language of Cameroon, has been illustrated
by the Baptist missionary Saker in his works published about 1860, and
since 1900 by German missionaries and explorers (such as Schuler). The
German work on the Duala language is mostly published in the _Mittheilungen
des Seminärs für Orientalische Sprachen_ (Berlin); see also Schuler's
_Grammatik des Duala_. The Rev. S. Koelle, in his _Polyglotta Africana_,
published in 1851, gave a good many interesting vocabularies of the almost
unknown north-west Bantu borderland, as well as of other forms of Bantu
speech of the Congo coast and Congo basin. J. T. Last, in his _Polyglotta
Africana Orientalis_, has illustrated briefly many of the East African
dialects and languages, some otherwise touched by no one else. He has also
published an excellent grammar of the _Kaguru_ language of the East African
highlands (Usagara). The fullest information is now extant regarding the
languages of _Uganda_ and _Unyoro_, in works by the missionaries of the
Church Missionary Society (Pilkington, Blackledge, Hattersley, Henry Duta
and others). Mr Crabtree, of the same mission, has collected information
regarding the _Masaba_ dialects of Elgon, and these have also been
illustrated by Mr C. W. Hobley, and by Sir H. H. Johnston (_Uganda
Protectorate_), and privately by Mr S. A. Northcote. Mr A. C. Madan has
published works on the _Swahili_ language and on the little-known _Senga_
of Central Zambezia and _Wisa_ of North-East Rhodesia (Oxford University
Press). Jacottet (Paris, 1902) has in his _Grammaire Subiya_ provided an
admirable study of the _Subiya_ and _Luyi_ languages of Barotseland, and in
1907, Edwin W. Smith (Oxford University Press) brought out a _Handbook of
the Ila Language_ (Mashukulumbwe). The Rev. W. Govan Robertson is the
author of a complete study of the _Bemba_ language. Mrs Sydney Hinde has
illustrated the dialects of _Kikuyu_ and _Kamba_. F. Van der Burgt has
published a _Dictionary of Kirundi_ (the language spoken at the north end
of Tanganyika). _Oci-herero_ of Damaraland has chiefly been illustrated by
German writers, old and new; such as Dr Kolbe and Dr P. H. Brincker. The
northern languages of this Herero group have been studied by members of the
American Mission at Bailundu under the name of _Umbundu_. Some information
on the languages of the south-western part of the Congo basin and those of
south-eastern Angola may be found in the works of Capello and Ivens and of
Henrique de Carvalho and Commander V. L. Cameron. The British, French and
German missionaries have published many dictionaries and grammars of the
different _Secuana_ dialects, notable amongst which is John Brown's
_Dictionary of Secuana_ and Meinhof's _Study of the T[vs]i-venda_. The
grammars and dictionaries of Zulu-Kaffir are almost too numerous to
catalogue. Among the best are Maclaren's _Kafir Grammar_ and Roberts' _Zulu
Dictionary_. The works of Boyce, Appleyard and Bishop Colenso should also
be consulted. Miss A. Werner has written important studies on the Zulu
click-words and other grammatical essays and vocabularies of the Bantu
languages in the _Journal of the African Society_ between 1902 and 1906.
The Tebele dialect of Zulu has been well illustrated by W. A. Elliott in
his _Dictionary of the Tebele and Shuna languages_ (London, 1897). The
_Ronga_ (_Tonga_, _Si-gwamba_, _Hlengwe_, &c.) are dealt with in the
_Grammaire Ronga_ (Lausanne, 1896) of Henri Junod. Bishop Smyth and John
Mathews have published a vocabulary and short grammar of the _Xilenge_
(Shilenge) language of Inhambane (_S.P.C.R._, 1902). The journal
_Anthropos_ (Vienna) should also be consulted.

(H. H. J.)

[1] _Bantu_ (literally _Ba-ntu_) is the most archaic and most widely spread
term for "men," "mankind," "people," in these languages. It also indicates
aptly the leading feature of this group of tongues, which is the governing
of the unchangeable root by prefixes. The syllable _-ntu_ is nowhere found
now standing alone, but it originally meant "object," or possibly "person."
It is also occasionally used as a relative pronoun--"that," "that which,"
"he who." Combined with different prefixes it has different meanings. Thus
(in the purer forms of Bantu languages) _muntu_ means "a man," _bantu_
means "men," _kintu_ means "a thing," _bintu_ "things," _kantu_ means "a
little thing," _tuntu_ "little things," and so on. This term _Bantu_ has
been often criticized, but no one has supplied a better, simpler
designation for this section of Negro languages, and the name has now been
definitely consecrated by usage.

[2] In Luganda and other languages of Uganda and the Victoria Nyanza, and
also in Runyoro on the Victoria Nile, the word for "fowl" is _enkoko_. In
Ki-Swahili of Zanzibar it is _kuku_. In Zulu it is _inkuku_. In some of the
Cameroon languages it is _lokoko_, _ngoko_, _ngok_, and on the Congo it is
_nkogo_, _nsusu_. On the Zambezi it is _nkuku_; so also throughout the
tribes of Lakes Nyasa and Tanganyika, and most dialects of South Africa.

[3] From this statement are excepted those tongues classified as
"semi-Bantu." In some languages of the Lower Niger and of the Gold Coast
the word for "fowl" is generally traceable to a root _kuba_. This form
_kuba_ also enters the Cameroon region, where it exists alongside of
_-koko_. _Kuba_ may have arisen independently, or have been derived from
the Bantu _kuku_.

[4] Whence the many _nyanza_, _nyanja_, _nyasa_, _mwanza_, of African
geography.

[5] In using the forms Uganda, Unyoro, the writer accepts the popular
mis-spelling. These countries should be called Buganda and Bunyoro, and
their languages Luganda and Runyoro.

[6] It is an important and recently discovered fact (delineated in the work
of the Baptist missionaries and of the Austrian traveller Dr. Franz
Thonner) that the Congo at its northern and north-eastern bend, between the
Rubi river and Stanley Falls, lies outside the Bantu field. The _Bondonga_
and _Wamanga_ languages are not Bantu. They are allied to the _Mbuba-Momfu_
of the Ituri and Nepoko, and also to the _Mundu_ of the Egyptian Sudan. The
Mundu group extends westward to the Ubangi river, as far south as 3° 30' N.
See _George Grenfell and the Congo_, by Sir Harry Johnston; and _Dans la
Grande Forêt de l'Afrique équatoriale_, by Franz Thonner (1899).

[7] These features are characteristic of almost all the Negro languages of
Africa.

[8] This does not preclude the _aspiration_ of consonants, or the
occasional local change of a palatal into a guttural.

[9] As already mentioned, a somewhat similar concord is also present as
regards the _suffixes_ of the Fula and the Kiama (_Tem_) languages in
Western Africa, and as regards the _prefixes_ of the Timne language of
Sierra Leone; it exists likewise in Hottentot and less markedly in many
Aryan, Semitic and Hamitic tongues.

[10] An apparent but not a real exception to this rule is in the second
person plural of the imperative mood, where an abbreviated form of the
pronoun is _affixed_ to the verb. Other phases of the verb may be
occasionally emphasized by the repetition of the governing pronoun at the
end.

[11] The full hypothetical forms of the prefixes as joined with definite
articles--_Ñgumu_, _Mbaba_, _Ñgimi_, _Ñgama_ and so on--are added in
brackets. Forms very like these are met with still in the Mt. Elgon
languages (Group No. 3) and in _Subiya_ group (No. 32).

[12] This is prominently met with in East Africa, and also in the various
Bechuana dialects of Central South Africa, where it takes the form of _ñ_
at the end of words.

[13] Or perhaps _ñga-ba-ntu_ (afterwards _ña-ba-_, _aba-_); the form
_ñgabantu_ is actually met with in Zulu-Kaffir: also _ñgumuntu_.

[14] Likewise _ba-_ may have meant "two" (Bantu root _Bali_ = two); a dual
first and then a plural.

[15] _Wa-_ in Luganda. In Lusoga (north coast of Victoria Nyanza) _Wa-_
becomes _[Gamma]a_ (_Gha_).

[16] _Mi_ is possibly a softening of _ñgi_, _ñi_; _ñgi_ becomes in some
dialects _nji_, _ndi_, _ni_ or _mbi_; there is in some of the coast
Cameroon languages, and in the north-eastern Congo, a word _mbi_, _mba_ for
"I," "me," which seems to be borrowed from the Sudanian Mundu tongues. The
possessive pronoun for the first person is devired from two forms, _-ami_
and _-añgi_ (_-am_, _-añgu_, _-anji_, _-ambi_, &c.).

[17] An exception to this rule is the verbal particle _li_ or _di_, which
means "to be."

[18] Or _-ira_, _-era_.

[19] This form may also appear as _[vs]a_, as for instance _aka_--to be on
fire becomes _a[vs]a_, to set on fire.

[20] In choosing this common root _tanda_, and applying it to the above
various terminations, the writer is not prepared to say that it is
associated with all of them in any one Bantu language. Although _tanda_ is
a common verb in Zulu, it has not in Zulu _all_ these variations, and in
some other language where it may by chance exhibit all the variations its
own form is changed to _londa_ or _randa_.