BANVILLE, THÉODORE FAULLAIN DE (1823-1891), French poet and miscellaneous
writer, was born at Moulins in the Bourbonnais, on the 14th of March 1823.
He was the son of a captain in the French navy. His boyhood, by his own
account, was cheerlessly passed at a lycée in Paris; he was not harshly
treated, but took no part in the amusements of his companions. On leaving
school with but slender means of support, he devoted himself to letters,
and in 1842 published his first volume of verse (_Les Cariatides_), which
was followed by _Les Stalactites_ in 1846. The poems encountered some
adverse criticism, but secured for their author the approbation and
friendship of Alfred de Vigny and Jules Janin. Henceforward Banville's life
was steadily devoted to literary production and criticism. He printed other
volumes of verse, among which the _Odes funambulesques_ (Alençon, 1857)
received unstinted praise from Victor Hugo, to whom they were dedicated.
Later, several of his comedies in verse were produced at the Théâtre
Français and on other stages; and from 1853 onwards a stream of prose
flowed from his industrious pen, including studies of Parisian manners,
sketches of well-known persons (_Camées parisiennes_, &c.), and a series of
tales (_Contes bourgeois_, _Contes héroïques_, &c.), most of which were
republished in his collected works (1875-1878). He also wrote freely for
reviews, and acted as dramatic critic for more than one newspaper.
Throughout a life spent mainly in Paris, Banville's genial character and
cultivated mind won him the friendship of the chief men of letters of his
time. He was also intimate with Frédérick-Lemaître and other famous actors.
In 1858 he was decorated with the legion of honour, and was promoted to be
an officer of the order in 1886. He died in Paris on the 15th of March
1891, having just completed his sixty-eighth year. Banville's claim to
remembrance rests mainly on his poetry. His plays are written with
distinction and refinement, but are deficient in dramatic power; his
stories, though marked by fertility of invention, are as a rule
conventional and unreal. Most of his prose, indeed, in substance if not in
manner, is that of a journalist. His lyrics, however, rank high. A careful
and loving student of the finest models, he did even more than his greater
and somewhat older comrades, Victor Hugo, Alfred de Musset and Théophile
Gautier, to free French poetry from the fetters of metre and mannerism in
which it had limped from the days of Malherbe. In the _Odes funambulesques_
and elsewhere he revived with perfect grace and understanding the _rondeau_
and the _villanelle_, and like Victor Hugo in _Les Orientales_, wrote
_pantoums_ (pantuns) after the Malay fashion. He published in 1872 a _Petit
traité de versification française_ in exposition of his metrical methods.
He was a master of delicate satire, and used with much effect the difficult
humour of sheer bathos, happily adapted by him from some of the early
folk-songs. He has somewhat rashly been compared to Heine, whom he
profoundly admired; but if he lacked the supreme touch of genius, he
remains a delightful writer, who exercised a wise and sound influence upon
the art of his generation.

Among his other works may be mentioned the poems, _Idylles prussiennes_
(1871), and _Trente-six ballades joyeuses_ (1875); the prose tales, _Les
Saltimbanques_ (1853); _Esquisses parisiennes_ (1859) and _Contes
féeriques_; and the plays, _Le Feuilleton d'Aristophane_ (1852),
_Gringoire_ (1866), and _Deidamia_ (1876).

See also J. Lemaître, _Les Contemporains_ (first series, 1885);
Sainte-Beuve, _Causeries du lundi_, vol. xiv.; Maurice Spronck, _Les
Artistes littéraires_ (1889).

(C.)