BAPTISTE, NICOLAS ANSELME (1761-1835), French actor, was born in Bordeaux
on the 18th of June 1761, the elder son of Joseph François Anselme, a
popular actor. His mother played leading parts in tragedy, and both his
parents enjoyed the protection of Voltaire and the friendship of Lekain. It
was probably under the auspices of the latter that Nicolas Anselme made his
first appearance as de Belloy in _Gaston et Bayard_; and shortly
afterwards, under the name of Baptiste, he made a contract to play young
lover parts at Arras, where he also appeared in opera and even in
pantomime. From Rouen, where he had three successful years, his reputation
spread to Paris and he was summoned to the new theatre which the comedian
Langlois-Courcelles had just founded, and where he succeeded, not only in
making an engagement for himself, but in bringing all his family, father,
mother, wife and brother. They were thus distinguished in the playbills:
Baptiste, _aîné_, Baptiste _père_, Baptiste _cadet_, Madame Baptiste
_mère_, Madame Baptiste _bru_. This resulted in the pun of calling a play
in which they all appeared _une pièce de baptistes_. Nicolas soon obtained
the public favour, specially in La Martellière's mediocre _Robert, chef de
[v.03 p.0370] brigands_, and as Count Almaviva, in Beaumarchais' _La Mère
coupable_. His success in this was so great that the directors of the
Théâtre de la République--who had already secured Talma, Dugazon and Madame
Vestris--hastened to obtain his services, and, in order to get him at once
(1793), paid the 20,000 francs forfeit which he was obliged to surrender on
breaking his contract. Later he, as well as his younger brother, became
_sociétaire_. Nicolas took all the leading parts in comedy and tragedy. As
he grew older his special _forte_ lay in noble fathers. After a brilliant
career of thirty-five years of uninterrupted service, he retired in 1828.
But, after the revolution of 1830, when the Théâtre Français was in great
straits, the brothers Baptiste came to the rescue, reappeared on the stage
and helped to bring back its prosperity. The elder died in Paris on the 1st
of December 1835. The younger brother, Paul Eustache Anselme, known as
BAPTISTE _cadet_ (1765-1839), was also a comedian of great talent, and had
a long and brilliant career at the Comédie Française, where he made his
_début_ in 1792 in _L'Amour et l'intérêt_.