BARANTE, AMABLE GUILLAUME PROSPER BRUGIÉRE, BARON DE (1782-1866), French
statesman and historian, the son of an advocate, was born at Riom on the
16th of June 1782. At the age of sixteen he entered the École Polytechnique
at [v.03 p.0380] Paris, and at twenty obtained his first appointment in the
civil service. His abilities secured him rapid promotion, and in 1806 he
obtained the post of auditor to the council of state. After being employed
in several political missions in Germany, Poland and Spain, during the next
two years, he became prefect of Vendée. At the time of the return of
Napoleon I. he held the prefecture of Nantes, and this post he immediately
resigned. On the second restoration of the Bourbons he was made councillor
of state and secretary-general of the ministry of the interior. After
filling for several years the post of director-general of indirect taxes,
he was created in 1819 a peer of France and was prominent among the
Liberals. After the revolution of July 1830, M. de Barante was appointed
ambassador to Turin, and five years later to St Petersburg. Throughout the
reign of Louis Philippe he remained a supporter of the government; and
after the fall of the monarchy, in February 1848, he withdrew from
political affairs and retired to his country seat in Auvergne. Shortly
before his retirement he had been made grand cross of the Legion of Honour.
Barante's _Histoire des ducs de Bourgogne de la maison de Valois_, which
appeared in a series of volumes between 1824 and 1828, procured him
immediate admission to the French Academy. Its narrative qualities, and
purity of style, won high praise from the romantic school, but it exhibits
a lack of the critical sense and of scientific scholarship. Amongst his
other literary works are a _Tableau de la littérature française au
dixhuitième siècle_, of which several editions were published; _Des
communes et de l'aristocratie_ (1821); a French translation of the dramatic
works of Schiller; _Questions constitutionnelles_ (1850); _Histoire de la
Convention Nationale_, which appeared in six volumes between 1851 and 1853;
_Histoire du Directoire de la République française_ (1855); _Études
historiques et biographiques_ (1857); _La Vie politique de M.
Royer-Collard_ (1861). The version of _Hamlet_ for Guizot's _Shakespeare_
was his work. He died on the 22nd of November 1866.

His _Souvenirs_ were published by his grandson (Paris, 1890-99). See also
the article by Guizot in the _Revue des deux Mondes_, July 1867.