BARBERINI, the name of a powerful Italian family, originally of Tuscan
extraction, who settled in Florence during the early part of the 11th
century. They acquired great wealth and influence, and in 1623 Maffeo
Barberini was raised to the papal throne as Urban VIII. He made his
brother, Antonio, a distinguished soldier, and two nephews, cardinals, and
gave to a third nephew, Taddeo, the principality of Palestrina. Great
jealousy of their increasing power was excited amongst the neighbouring
princes, and Odoardo Farnese, duke of Parma, made war upon Taddeo, and
defeated the papal troops. After the death of Urban in 1644 his successor,
Innocent X., showed hostility to the Barberini family. Taddeo fled to
Paris, where he died in 1647, and with him the family became extinct in the
male line. His daughter Cornelia married Prince Giulio Cesare Colonna di
Sciarra in 1728, who added her name to his own. On the death of Prince
Enrico Barberini-Colonna the name went to his daughter and heiress Donna
Maria and her husband Marquis Luigi Sacchetti, who received the title of
prince of Palestrina and permission to bear the name of Barberini. The fine
Barberini palace and library in Rome give evidence of their wealth and
magnificence. The ruthless way in which they plundered ancient buildings to
adorn their own palaces is the origin of the saying, "Quod non fecerunt
barbari, fecerunt Barberini."

See A. von Reumont, _Geschichte der Stadt Rom_ (Berlin, 1868), iii. b.
611-612, 615, 617, &c.; _Almanach de Gotha_ (Gotha, 1902); J. H. Douglas,
_The Principal Noble Families of Rome_ (Rome, 1905).