BARBIERI, GIOVANNI FRANCESCO (otherwise called GUERCINO, from his
squinting), (1591-1666), Italian historical painter, was born at Cento, a
village not far from Bologna. His artistic powers were developed very
rapidly, and at the age of seventeen he was associated with Benedetto
Gennari (1550-1610), a well-known painter of the Bolognese school. The fame
of the young painter spread beyond his native village, and in 1615 he
removed to Bologna, where his paintings were much admired. His first style
was formed after that of the Caracci; but the strong colouring and shadows
employed by Caravaggio made a deep impression on his mind, and for a
considerable period his productions showed evident traces of that painter's
influence. Some of his latest pieces approach rather to the manner of his
great contemporary Guido, and are painted with more lightness and
clearness. Guercino was esteemed very highly in his lifetime, not only by
the nobles and princes of Italy, but by his brother artists, who placed him
in the first rank of painters. He was remarkable for the extreme rapidity
of his execution; he completed no fewer than 106 large altar-pieces for
churches, and his other paintings amount to about 144. His most famous
piece is thought to be the St Petronilla, which was painted at Rome for
Gregory XV. and is now in the Capitol. In 1626 he began his frescoes in the
Duomo at Piacenza. Guercino continued to paint and teach up to the time of
his death in 1666. He had amassed a handsome fortune by his labours. His
life, by J. A. Calvi, appeared at Bologna in 1808.

His brother, PAOLO ANTONIO BARBIERI (1603-1649), was a celebrated painter
of still life and animals. He chose for his subjects fruits, flowers,
insects and animals, which he painted after nature with a lively tint of
colour, great tenderness of pencil, and a strong character of truth and
life.