BARBITON, or BARBITOS (Gr. [Greek: barbiton] or [Greek: barbitos]; Lat.
_barbitus_; Pers. _barbat_, _barbud_), an ancient stringed instrument known
to us from the Greek and Roman classics, but derived from Persia.
Theocritus (xvi. 45), the Sicilian poet, calls it an instrument of many
strings, _i.e._ more than seven, which was by the Hellenes accounted the
perfect number, as in the cithara of the best period. Anacreon,[1] (a
native of Teos in Asia Minor) sings that his barbitos only gives out erotic
tones. Pollux (_Onomasticon_ iv. chap. 8, § 59) calls the instrument
barbiton or barymite (from [Greek: barus], heavy and [Greek: mitos], a
string), an instrument producing deep sounds; the strings were twice as
long as those of the pectis and sounded an octave lower. Pindar (in Athen.
xiv. p. 635), in the same line wherein he attributes the introduction of
the instrument into Greece to Terpander, tells us one could magadize,
_i.e._ play in two parts at an interval of an octave on the two
instruments. The word barbiton was frequently used for the lyre itself.
Although in use in Asia Minor, Italy, [v.03 p.0388] Sicily, and Greece, it
is evident that the barbiton never won for itself a place in the affections
of the Greeks of Hellas; it was regarded as a barbarian instrument affected
by those only whose tastes in matters of art were unorthodox. It had fallen
into disuse in the days of Aristotle,[2] but reappeared under the Romans.

In spite of the few meagre shreds of authentic information extant
concerning this somewhat elusive instrument, it is possible nevertheless to
identify the barbiton as it was known among the Greeks and Romans. From the
Greek writers we know that it was an instrument having some feature or
features in common with the lyre, which warranted classification with it.
From the Persians and Arabs we learn that it was a kind of _rebab_ or lute,
or a chelys-lyre,[3] first introduced into Europe through Asia Minor by way
of Greece, and centuries later into Spain by the Moors, amongst whom it was
in the 14th century known as _al-barbet_.[4] There is a stringed
instrument, as yet unidentified by name, of which there are at least four
different representations in sculpture,[5] which combines the
characteristics of both lyre and rebab, having the vaulted back and gradual
narrowing to form a neck which are typical of the rebab and the stringing
of the lyre. In outline it resembles a large lute with a wide neck, and the
seven strings of the lyre of the best period, or sometimes nine, following
the decadent lyre. Most authors in reproducing these sculptures showing the
barbiton represent the instrument as boat-shaped and without a neck, as,
for instance, Carl Engel. This is due to the fact that the part of the
instrument where neck joins body is in deep shadow, so that the correct
outline can hardly be distinguished, being almost hidden by hand on one
side and drapery on the other.

[Illustration: Barbiton, from a bas-relief in the Louvre, "Achilles at
Scyros."]

The barbiton, as pictured here, had probably undergone considerable
modification at the hands of the Greeks and had diverged from the
archetype. The barbiton, however, although it underwent many changes,
retained until the end the characteristics of the instruments of the Greek
lyre whose strings were plucked, whereas the rebab was sounded by means of
the bow at the time of its introduction into Europe. At some period not yet
determined, which we can but conjecture, the barbat approximated to the
form of the large _lute_ (_q.v._). An instrument called barbiton was known
in the early part of the 16th[6] and during the 17th century. It was a kind
of theorbo or bass-lute, but with one neck only, bent back at right angles
to form the head. Robert Fludd[7] gives a detailed description of it with
an illustration:--"Inter quas instrumenta non nulla barbito simillima
effinxerunt cujus modi sunt illa quae vulgo appellantur theorba, quae sonos
graviores reddunt chordasque nervosas habent." The people called it
_theorbo_, but the scholar having identified it with the instrument of
classic Greece and Rome called it barbiton. The barbiton had nine pairs of
gut strings, each pair being in unison. Dictionaries of the 18th century
support Fludd's use of the name barbiton. G. B. Doni[8] mentions the
barbiton, defining it in his index as _Barbitos seu major chelys italice
tiorba_, and deriving it from lyre and cithara in common with testudines,
tiorbas and all tortoiseshell instruments. Claude Perrault,[9] writing in
the 18th century, states that "les modernes appellent notre luth barbiton"
(the moderns call our lute barbiton). Constantijn Huygens[10] declares that
he learnt to play the barbiton in a few weeks, but took two years to learn
the cittern.

The _barbat_ was a variety of _rebab_ (_q.v._), a bass instrument,
differing only in size and number of strings. This is quite in accordance
with what we know of the nomenclature of musical instruments among Persians
and Arabs, with whom a slight deviation in the construction of an
instrument called for a new name.[11] The word _barbud_ applied to the
barbiton is said to be derived[12] from a famous musician living at the
time of Chosroes II. (A.D. 590-628), who excelled in playing upon the
instrument. From a later translation of part of the same authority into
German[13] we obtain the following reference to Persian musical
instruments: "Die Sänger stehen bei seinem Gastmahl; in ihrer Hand
Barbiton^{(i.)} und Leyer^{(ii.)} und Laute^{(iii.)} und Flöte^{(iv.)} und
Deff (Handpauke)." Mr Ellis, of the Oriental Department of the British
Museum, has kindly supplied the original Persian names translated above,
_i.e._ (i.) _barbut_, (ii.) _chang_, (iii.) _rub[=a]b_, (iv.) _nei_. The
barbut and rubab thus were different instruments as late as the 19th
century in Persia. There were but slight differences if any between the
archetypes of the pear-shaped rebab and of the lute before the application
of the bow to the former--both had vaulted backs, body and neck in one, and
gut strings plucked by the fingers.

(K. S.)

[1] See Bergk's _Poetae Lyrici Graeci_ (4th ed., 1882), p. 291, _fr._ 143
[113]; and p. 311, 23 [1], 3; and 14 [9], 34, p. 306.

[2] _Polit._ viii. (v.), 6, ed. Susemihl-Hicks (1894), pp. 604 (= 1341a 40)
and 632; Daremberg and Saglio, _Dict. d'ant. gr. et rom._, article "Lyre,"
p. 1450, for a few more references to the classics.

[3] Johnson's Persian-Arabic-English dictionary: _barbat_, a harp or lute,
_barbatzan_, player upon lute, pl._bar[=a]bit_; G. W. Freytag, _Lexicon
Arabico-Latinum_, i. p. 102; _barbat_ (Persian and Arabic), barbitus, genus
testudinis, plerumque sex septamve chordis instructum (rotundam habet
formam in Africa); _Lexicon Aegidii Forcellini_ (Prato, 1858; "Barbito
aurataque chely ac doctis fidibus personare" (Martianus Capella i. 36);
G. B. Doni, _Lyra Barberina_, ii. index.

[4] _Enumeration of Arab Musical Instruments_, xiv. c.

[5] (a) See C. Clarac, _Musée du Louvre_, vol. i. pl. 202, No. 261. (b)
Accompanying illustration. See also Kathleen Schlesinger, "Orchestral
Instruments", part ii., "Precursors of the Violin Family," fig. 108 and p.
23, pp. 106-107, fig. 144 and appendix. (c) Sarcophagus in the cathedral of
Girgenti in Sicily, illustrated by Carl Engel, _Early History of the Violin
Family_, p. 112. A cast is preserved in the sepulchral basement at the
British Museum. Domenico, _Lo Faso Pietra-Santa, le antichità della
Sicilia_ (Palermo, 1834), vol. 3, pl. 45 (2), text p. 89. (d) C. Zoega,
_Antike Basreliefe von Rom_ (Giessen, 1812), atlas, pl. 98, sarcophagus
representing a scene in the story of Hippolytus and Phaedra.

[6] In Jacob Locher's _Navis Stultifera_ (Basil, 1506), titulus 7, is an
illustration of a small harp and lute with the legend _nec cytharum tangit
nec barbiton_.

[7] _Historia Utriusque Cosmi_ (Oppenheim, 1617), tom. i. tract ii. part
ii. lib. iv. cap. i. p. 226.

[8] _Lyra Barberina_, vol. ii. index, and also vol. i. p. 29.

[9] "La Musique des anciens," _Oeuvres complètes_ (ed. Amsterdam, 1727),
tom. i. p. 306.

[10] _De Vita propria sermonum inter liberos libri duo_ (Haarlem, 1817).
See also Edmund van der Straeten, _La Musique aux Pays-Bas_, vol. ii. p.
349.

[11] See _The Seven Seas_, a dictionary and grammar of the Persian
language, by Ghazi ud-din Haidar, king of Oudh, in seven parts (Lucknow,
1822) (only the title of the book is in English). A review of this book in
German with copious quotations by von Hammer-Purgstall is published in
_Jahrbücher der Literatur_ (Vienna, 1826), Bd. 35 and 36; names of musical
instruments, Bd. 36, p. 292 et seq. See also R. G. Kiesewetter, _Die Musik
der Araber, nach Originalquellen dargestellt_ (Leipzig, 1843, p. 91,
classification of instruments).

[12] _The Seven Seas_, part i. p. 153; _Jahrb. d. Literatur_, Bd. 36, p.
294.

[13] Fr. Rückert, _Grammatik, Poetik und Rhetorik der Perser, nach dem
7^{ten} Bde. des Hefts Kolzum_ (Gotha, 1874), p. 80.