BARBÉ-MARBOIS, FRANÇOIS, MARQUIS DE (1745-1837), French politician, was
born at Metz. He began his public career as intendant of San Domingo under
the old régime. At the close of 1789 he returned to France, and then placed
his services at the disposal of the revolutionary government. In 1791 he
was sent to Regensburg to help de Noailles, the French ambassador, in the
negotiations with the diet of the Empire concerning the [v.03 p.0386]
possessions of German princes in Alsace and Lorraine. Suspected of treason,
he was arrested on his return but set at liberty again. In 1795 he was
elected to the Council of the Ancients, where the general moderation of his
attitude, especially in his opposition to the exclusion of nobles and the
relations of _émigrés_ from public life, brought him under suspicion of
being a royalist, though he pronounced a eulogy on Bonaparte for his
success in Italy. At the _coup d'état_ of the 18th Fructidor (September 4)
1797, he was arrested and transported to French Guiana. Transferred to
Oléron in 1799, he owed his liberty to Napoleon, after the 18th Brumaire.
In 1801 he became councillor of state and director of the public treasury,
and in 1802 a senator. In 1803 he negotiated the treaty by which Louisiana
was ceded to the United States, and was rewarded by the First Consul with a
gift of 152,000 francs. In 1805 he was made grand officer of the legion of
honour and a count, and in 1808 he became president of the _cour des
comptes_. In return for these favours, he addressed Napoleon with servile
compliments; yet in 1814 he helped to draw up the act of abdication of the
emperor, and declared to the _cour des comptes_, with reference to the
invasion of France by the allies, "united for the most beautiful of causes,
it is long since we have been so free as we now are in the presence of the
foreigner in arms." In June 1814, Louis XVIII. named him peer of France and
confirmed him in his office as president of the _cour des comptes_.
Deprived of his positions by Napoleon during the Hundred Days he was
appointed minister of justice in the ministry of the duc de Richelieu
(August 1815). In this office he tried unsuccessfully to gain the
confidence of the ultra-royalists, and withdrew at the end of nine months
(May 10, 1816).

In 1830, when Louis Philippe assumed the reins of government, Barbé-Marbois
went, as president of the _cour des comptes_, to compliment him and was
confirmed in his position. It was the sixth government he had served and
all with servility. He held his office until April 1834, and died on the
12th of February 1837. He published various works, of which may be
mentioned: _Réflexions sur la colonie de Saint-Domingue_ (1794), _De la
Guyane, &c._ (1822), an _Histoire de la Louisiane et la cession de cette
colonie par la France aux États-Unis, &c._ (1828), and the story of his
transportation after the 18th Fructidor in _Journal d'un déporté non jugé_,
2 vols. (1834).