BARBEY D'AUREVILLY, JULES AMÉDÉE (1808-1889), French man of letters, was
born at Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte (Manche) on the 2nd of November 1808. His
most famous novels are _Une Vieille Maîtresse_ (1851), attacked at the time
of its publication on the charge of immorality; _L'Ensorcelée_ (1854), an
episode of the royalist rising among the Norman peasants against the first
republic; the _Chevalier Destouches_ (1864); and a collection of
extraordinary stories entitled _Les Diaboliques_ (1874). Barbey d'Aurevilly
is an extreme example of the eccentricities of which the Romanticists were
capable, and to read him is to understand the discredit that fell upon the
manner. He held extreme Catholic views and wrote on the most _risqué_
subjects, he gave himself aristocratic airs and hinted at a mysterious
past, though his parentage was entirely _bourgeois_ and his youth very
hum-drum and innocent. In the 'fifties d'Aurevilly became literary critic
of the _Pays_, and a number of his essays, contributed to this and other
journals, were collected as _Les Oeuvres et les hommes du XIX^e siècle_
(1861-1865). Other literary studies are _Les Romanciers_ (1866) and _Goethe
et Diderot_ (1880). He died in Paris on the 23rd of April 1889. Paul
Bourget describes him as a dreamer with an exquisite sense of vision, who
sought and found in his work a refuge from the [v.03 p.0387] uncongenial
world of every day. Jules Lemaître, a less sympathetic critic, finds in the
extraordinary crimes of his heroes and heroines, his reactionary views, his
dandyism and snobbery, an exaggerated Byronism.

See also Alcide Dusolier, _Jules Barbey d'Aurevilly_ (1862), a collection
of eulogies and interviews; Paul Bourget, Preface to d'Aurevilly's
_Memoranda_ (1883); Jules Lemaître, _Les Contemporains_; Eugène Grelé,
_Barbey d'Aurevilly, sa vie et son oeuvre_ (1902); René Doumic, in the
_Revue des deux mondes_ (Sept. 1902).