BARBAULD, ANNA LETITIA (1743-1825), English poet and miscellaneous writer,
was born at Kibworth-Harcourt, in Leicestershire, on the 20th of June 1743.
Her father, the Rev. John Aikin, a Presbyterian minister and schoolmaster,
taught his daughter Latin and Greek. In 1758 Mr Aikin removed his family to
Warrington, to act as theological tutor in a dissenting academy there. In
1773 Miss Aikin published a volume of _Poems_, which was very successful,
and co-operated with her brother, Dr John Aikin, in a volume of
_Miscellaneous Pieces in Prose_. In 1774 she married Rochemont Barbauld, a
member of a French Protestant family settled in England. He had been
educated in the academy at Warrington, and was minister of a Presbyterian
church at Palgrave, in Suffolk, where, with his wife's help, he established
a boarding school. Her admirable _Hymns in Prose and Early Lessons_ were
written for their pupils. In 1785 she left England for the continent with
her husband, whose health was seriously impaired. On their return about two
years later, Mr Barbauld was appointed to a church at Hampstead. In 1802
they removed to Stoke Newington. Mrs Barbauld became well known in London
literary circles. She collaborated with Dr Aikin in his _Evenings at Home_;
in 1795 she published an edition of Akenside's _Pleasures of Imagination_,
with a critical essay; two years later she edited Collins's _Odes_; in 1804
she published a selection of papers from the English Essayists, and a
selection from Samuel Richardson's correspondence, with a biographical
notice; in 1810 a collection of the _British Novelists_ (50 vols.) with
biographical and critical notices; and in 1811 her longest poem, _Eighteen
Hundred and Eleven_, giving a gloomy view of the existing state and future
prospects of Britain. This poem anticipated Macaulay in contemplating the
prospect of a visitor from the antipodes regarding at a future day the
ruins of St Paul's from a broken arch of Blackfriars Bridge. Mrs Barbauld
died on the 9th of March 1825; her husband had died in 1808. A collected
edition of her works, with memoir, was published by her niece, Lucy Aikin,
in 2 vols., 1825.

See A. L. le Breton, _Memoir of Mrs Barbauld_ (1874); G. A. Ellis, _Life
and Letters of Mrs A. L. Barbauld_ (1874); and Lady Thackeray Ritchie, _A
Book of Sibyls_ (1883).