BARBOUR, JOHN (? 1316-1395), Scottish poet, was born, perhaps in
Aberdeenshire, early in the 14th century, approximately 1316. In a letter
of safe-conduct dated 1357, allowing him to go to Oxford for study, he is
described as archdeacon of Aberdeen. He is named in a similar letter in
1364 and in another in 1368 granting him permission to pass to France,
probably for further study, at the university of Paris. In 1372 he was one
of the auditors of exchequer, and in 1373 a clerk of audit in the king's
household. In 1375 (he gives the date, and his age as 60) he composed his
best known poem _The Brus_, for which he received, in 1377, the gift of ten
pounds, and, in 1378, a life-pension of twenty shillings. Additional
rewards followed, including the renewal of his exchequer auditorship
(though he may have continued to enjoy it since his first appointment) and
ten pounds to his pension. The only biographical evidence of his closing
years is his signature as a witness to sundry deeds in the "Register of
Aberdeen" as late as 1392. According to the obit-book of the cathedral of
Aberdeen, he died on the 13th of March 1395. The state records show that
his life-pension was not paid after that date.

Considerable controversy has arisen regarding Barbour's literary work. If
he be the author of the five or six long poems which have been ascribed to
him by different writers, he adds to his importance as the father of Scots
poetry the reputation of being one of the most voluminous writers in Middle
English, certainly the most voluminous of all Scots poets.

(1) _The Brus_, in twenty books, and running to over 13,500 four-accent
lines, in couplets, is a narrative poem with a purpose partly historical,
partly patriotic. It opens with a description of the state of Scotland at
the death of Alexander III. (1286) and concludes with the death of Douglas
and the burial of the Bruce's heart (1332). The central episode is the
battle of Bannockburn. Patriotic as the sentiment is, it is in more general
terms than is found in later Scots literature. The king is a hero of the
chivalric type common in contemporary romance; freedom is a "noble thing"
to be sought and won at all costs; the opponents of such freedom are shown
in the dark colours which history and poetic propriety require; but there
is none of the complacency of the merely provincial habit of mind. The
lines do not lack vigour; and there are passages of high merit, notably the
oft-quoted section beginning "A! fredome is a noble thing." Despite a
number of errors of fact, notably the confusion of the three Bruces in the
person of the hero, the poem is historically trustworthy as compared with
contemporary verse-chronicle, and especially with the _Wallace_ of the next
century. No one [v.03 p.0390] has doubted Barbour's authorship of the
_Brus_, but argument has been attempted to show that the text as we have it
is an edited copy, perhaps by John Ramsay, a Perth scribe, who wrote out
the two extant texts, preserved in the Advocates' library, Edinburgh, and
in the library of St John's College, Cambridge. Extensive portions of the
poem have been incorporated by Wyntoun (_q.v._) in his _Chronicle_. The
first printed edition extant is Charteris's (Edinburgh, 1571); the second
is Hart's (Edinburgh, 1616).

(2) Wyntoun speaks (_Chronicle_ III. iii.) of a "Treteis" which Barbour
made by way of "a genealogy" of "Brutus lynagis"; and elsewhere in that
poem there are references to the archdeacon's "Stewartis Oryginale." This
"Brut" is unknown; but the reference has been held by some to be to (3) a
Troy-book, based on Guido da Colonna's _Historia Destructionis Troiae_. Two
fragments of such a work have been preserved in texts of Lydgate's
_Troy-book_, the first in MS. Camb. Univ. Lib. Kk. v. 30, the second in the
same and in MS. Douce 148 in the Bodleian library, Oxford. This ascription
was first made by Henry Bradshaw, the librarian of Cambridge University;
but the consensus of critical opinion is now against it. Though it were
proved that these Troy fragments are Barbour's, there remains the question
whether their identification with the book on the Stewart line is
justified. The scale of the story in these fragments forces us to doubt
this identification. They contain 595 + 3118 = 3713 lines and are concerned
entirely with "Trojan" matters. This would be an undue allowance in a
Scottish "genealogy."

(4) Yet another work was added to the list of Barbour's works by the
discovery in the university library of Cambridge, by Henry Bradshaw, of a
long Scots poem of over 33,000 lines, dealing with _Legends of the Saints_,
as told in the _Legenda Aurea_ and other legendaries. The general likeness
of this poem to Barbour's accepted work in verse-length, dialect and style,
and the facts that the lives of English saints are excluded and those of St
Machar (the patron saint of Aberdeen) and St Ninian are inserted, made the
ascription plausible. Later criticism, though divided, has tended in the
contrary direction, and has based its strongest negative judgment on the
consideration of rhymes, assonance and vocabulary (see bibliography). That
the "district" of the author is the north-east of Scotland cannot be
doubted in the face of a passage such as this, in the fortieth legend (St
Ninian), 11, 1359 et seq.

 "A lytil tale [gh]et herd I tel,
  þat in to my tyme befel,
  of a gudman, in murrefe [_Moray_] borne
  in elgyne [_Elgin_], and his kine beforne,
  and callit was a faithful man
  vith al þame þat hyme knew than;
  & _þis mare trastely I say,_
  _for I kend hyme weile mony day._
  _John balormy ves his name,_
  a man of ful gud fame."

But whether this north-east Scots author is Barbour is a question which we
cannot answer by means of the data at present available.

(5) If Barbour be the author of the _Legends_, then (so does one conclusion
hang upon another) he is the author of a Gospel story with the later life
of the Virgin, described in the prologue to the _Legends_ and in other
passages as a book "of the birth of Jhesu criste" and one "quhare-in I
recordit the genology of our lady sanct Mary."

(6) In recent years an attempt has been made to name Barbour as the author
of the _Buik of Alexander_ (a translation of the _Roman d'Alexandre_ and
associated pieces, including the _Voeux du Paon_), as known in the unique
edition, _c._ 1580, printed at the Edinburgh press of Alexander Arbuthnot.
The "argument" as it stands is nothing more than an exaggerated inference
from parallel-passages in the _Bruce_ and _Alexander_; and it makes no
allowance for the tags, epithets and general vocabulary common to all
writers of the period. Should the assumption be proved to be correct, and
should it be found that the "_Troy fragments_ were written first of all,
followed by _Alexander_ and _Bruce_ or _Bruce_ and _Alexander_, and that
the _Legends_ end the chapter," it will be by "evidence" other than that
which has been produced to this date.

For Barbour's life see _Exchequer Rolls of Scotland_, ii. and iii.;
_Registrum Episcopatus Aberdonensis_ (Spalding Club); Rymer's _Foedera_.

WORKS.--(1)_The Brus_ MSS. and early editions _u.s._ Modern editions: J.
Pinkerton, 3 vols. (1790) (called by the editor "the first genuine
edition," because printed from the Advocates' Library text, but
carelessly); Jamieson (1820); Cosmo Innes (Spalding Club, 1856); W. W.
Skeat (Early English Text Society, 1870-1889; reprinted, after revision by
the editor, by the Scottish Text Society, 1893-1895). On the question of
the recension of Barbour's text, see J. T. T. Brown, _The Wallace and The
Bruce restudied_ (Bonn, 1900). (2 and 3) _Troy Fragments_. C. Horstmann has
printed the text in his _Legendensammlung_ (_ut infra_). See Bradshaw,
_Transactions of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society_ (1866); the prolegomena
in Horstmann's edition; Skeat, _Brus_ (S. T. S. edit. _u.s._ pp. xlvi. et
seq.); Köppel, "Die Fragmente von Barbours Trojanerkrieg," in _Englische
Studien_, x. 373; Panton and Donaldson, _The Gest Historiale of the
Destruction of Troye_ (E. E. T. S. pt. ii. Introd. pp. x. et seq.); G.
Neilson (_ut infra_); and J. T. T. Brown (_ut supra_) _passim_. (4)
_Legends of the Saints_. C. Horstmann, who upholds Barbour's authorship,
has printed the text in his _Barbours des schottischen Nationaldichters
Legendensammlung nebst den Fragmenten seines Trojanerkrieges_, 2 vols.
(Heilbronn, 1881-1882), and that of the legend of St Machor in his
_Altenglische Legenden_. _Neue Folge_ (Heilbronn, 1881) pp. 189-208. A
later edition by W. M. Metcalfe, who disputes Barbour's claim, appeared in
1896 (_Legends of the Saints in the Scottish Dialect of the Fourteenth
Century_, 3 vols., Scottish Text Society). See the introductions to these
editions; also Skeat and Koppel _u.s._, and P. Buss, _Sind die von
Horstmann herausgegebenen schottischen Legenden ein Werk Barberes?_ (Halle,
1886) (cf. _Anglia_, ix. 3, 1886). (5) For the Gospel-story evidence see
Metcalfe, _u.s._ I. xxix. (6) On the _Alexander Book_ and its assumed
relationships, see G. Neilson, _John Barbour, Poet and Translator_ (1900)
(a reprint from the _Transactions of the Philological Society_); J. T. T.
Brown _u.s._, "Postscript," pp. 156-171; and _Athenaeum_, 17th of November,
1st and 8th December 1900, and the 9th of February 1901.

(G. G. S.)