BARBAROUX, CHARLES JEAN MARIE (1767-1794), French revolutionist, was
educated at first by the Oratorians of Marseilles, then studied law, and
became a successful advocate. He was appointed secretary (_greffier_) to
the commune of Marseilles, and in 1792 was commissioned to go to the
Legislative Assembly and demand the accusation of the directory of the
department of Bouches-du-Rhone, as accomplice in a royalist movement in
Arles. At Paris he was received in the Jacobin club and entered into
relations with J. P. Brissot and the Rolands. It was at his instigation
that Marseilles sent to Paris the battalion of volunteers which contributed
to the insurrection of the 10th of August 1792 against the king. Returning
to Marseilles he helped to repress a royalist movement at Avignon and an
ultra-Jacobin movement [v.03 p.0383] at Marseilles, and was elected deputy
to the Convention by 775 votes out of 776 voting. From the first he posed
as an opponent of the Mountain, accused Robespierre of aiming at the
dictatorship (25th of September 1792), attacked Marat, and proposed to
break up the commune of Paris. Then he got the act of accusation against
Louis XVI. adopted, and in the trial voted for his death "without appeal
and without delay." During the final struggle between the Girondists and
the Mountain, he refused to resign as deputy and rejected the offer made by
the sections of Paris to give hostages for the arrested representatives. He
succeeded in escaping, first to Caen, where he organized the civil war,
then to Saint-Emilion near Bordeaux, where he wrote his _Mémoires_, which
were published in 1822 by his son, and re-edited in 1866. Discovered, he
attempted to shoot himself, but was only wounded, and was taken to
Bordeaux, where he was guillotined when his identity was established.

See Ch. Vatel, _Charlotte Corday et les Girondins_ (Paris, 1873); A.
Aulard, _Les Orateurs de la Législative et de la Convention_ (Paris, 2nd
ed., 1906).