BARBEYRAC, JEAN (1674-1744), French jurist, the nephew of Charles
Barbeyrac, a distinguished physician of Montpellier, was born at Beziers in
Lower Languedoc on the 15th of March 1674. He removed with his family into
Switzerland after the revocation of the edict of Nantes, and there studied
jurisprudence. After spending some time at Geneva and Frankfort-on-Main, he
became professor of belles-lettres in the French school of Berlin. Thence,
in 1711, he was called to the professorship of history and civil law at
Lausanne, and finally settled as professor of public law at Groningen. He
died on the 3rd of March 1744. His fame rests chiefly on the preface and
notes to his translation of Pufendorf's treatise _De Jure Naturae et
Gentium_. In fundamental principles he follows almost entirely Locke and
Pufendorf; but he works out with great skill the theory of moral
obligation, referring it to the command or will of God. He indicates the
distinction, developed more fully by Thomasius and Kant, between the legal
and the moral qualities of action. The principles of international law he
reduces to those of the law of nature, and combats, in so doing, many of
the positions taken up by Grotius. He rejects the notion that sovereignty
in any way resembles property, and makes even marriage a matter of civil
contract. Barbeyrac also translated Grotius's _De Jure Belli et Pacis_,
Cumberland's _De Legibus Naturae_, and Pufendorf's smaller treatise _De
Officio Hominis et Civis_. Among his own productions are a treatise, _De la
morale des pères_, a history of ancient treaties contained in the
_Supplément au grand corps diplomatique_, and the curious _Traité du jeu_
(1709), in which he defends the morality of games of chance.