BARCOCHEBAS, BAR-COCHAB, or BAR KOKBA ("son of a star"), the name given in
Christian sources to one Simeon, the leader in the Jewish revolt against
Rome in the time of Hadrian (A.D. 132-135). The name does not appear in the
Roman historians. In Rabbinic sources he is called Bar (Ben) Coziba, "son
of deceit," which perhaps reflects the later verdict of condemnation
recorded after his failure (root [Hebrew: KZB] "to be false"). Cochab is,
therefore, the name either of his father or of his home. But it is recorded
that the Rabbi `Aq[=i]ba (_q.v._), who recognized him as Messiah, applied
Num. xxiv. 17 to him, reading not _Cochab_ ("a star"), but _Cosiba_ ("goes
forth from Jacob"); thus Bar-cochab is a Messianic title of the "man of
Cozeba" (_cf._ Chron. iv. 22) whose original name was recalled by later
Rabbis with sinister intention. At first the Romans paid little attention
to the insurgents, who were able to strike coins in the name of Simeon,
prince of Israel, and Eleazar the priest, and to persecute the Christians,
who refused to join the revolt. But troops were collected and the various
fortresses occupied by the Jews were successively reduced. The end came
with the fall of Beth-thar (Bethar). Extraordinary stories were told of the
prowess of Barcochebas and of the ordeals to which he subjected his
soldiers in the way of training.

See Eusebius _H.E._ iv. 6; Dio Cassius xix. 12-14; Schürer, _Gesch. d. jüd.
Volkes_, 3rd ed. i. 682 ff.; Derenbourg, _Hist. de la Palest._ 423 ff.
(distinguishes Barcochebas from Simeon); Schlattler, _Gesch. Israels_, 2nd
ed. 303 ff.; articles JEWS and PALESTINE, _History_; also art. s.v. "Bar
Kokba" in _Jewish Encyc._ (S. Krauss).