BARCA (mod. _Merj_), an ancient city founded in the territory of Cyrene in
the middle of the 6th century B.C. Rising quickly to importance it became a
rival of the older city, and gave its name to the western province of the
latter's territory. The name as a provincial designation is still in
occasional use, but is now applied to all the province of Bengazi. Barca is
said to have owed its origin to Greek refugees flying from the tyranny of
Arcesilaus II. (see CYRENE), but it is certain that it was rather a Libyan
than a Greek town at all times. A Persian force invited by the notorious
Pheretima, mother of Arcesilaus III., in revenge for Barcan support of a
rival faction, sacked it towards the close of the 6th century and deported
a number of its inhabitants to Bactria. Under Ptolemaic rule it began to
decline, like Cyrene, and its port Ptolemais (Tolmeita) took its place: but
after the Arab conquest (A.D. 641) it became the chief place of the
Cyrenaica for a time and a principal station on the Kairawan road. Though
now a mere village, Merj is still the chief centre of administration
inland, and has a fort and small garrison. No ruins of earlier period than
the late Roman and early Arab seem to be visible on the site. The latter
lies, like Cyrene, about ten miles from the coast on the crest of Jebel
Akhdar, here sunk to a low downland. It owed its early prosperity to its
easy access to the sea, and to the fact that natural conditions in
Cyrenaica and the [v.03 p.0391] Sahara behind it, tend to divert trade to
the west of the district--a fact which is exemplified by the final survival
of Berenice (mod. Bengazi). Merj stands in a rich but ill-cultivated
stretch of red soil.

(D. G. H.)