BARGHEST, BARGUEST or BARGEST, the name given in the north of England,
especially in Yorkshire, to a monstrous goblin-dog with huge teeth and
claws. The spectre-hound under various names is familiar in folk-lore. The
Demon of Tedworth, the Black Dog of Winchester and the Padfoot of Wakefield
all shared the characteristics of the Barghest of York. In Wales its
counterpart was Gwyllgi, "the Dog of Darkness," a frightful apparition of a
mastiff with baleful breath and blazing red eyes. In Lancashire the
spectre-hound is called Trash or Striker. In Cambridgeshire and on the
Norfolk coast it is known as Shuck or Shock. In the Isle of Man it is
styled Mauthe Doog. It is mentioned by Sir Walter Scott in "The Lay of the
Last Minstrel"--

 "For he was speechless, ghastly, wan
  Like him of whom the story ran
  Who spoke the spectre hound in Man."

A Welsh variant is the _Cwn Annwn_, or "dogs of hell." The barghest was
essentially a nocturnal spectre, and its appearance was regarded as a
portent of death. Its Welsh form is confined to the sea-coast parishes, and
on the Norfolk coast the creature is supposed to be amphibious, coming out
of the sea by night and travelling about the lonely lanes. The derivation
of the word barghest is disputed. "Ghost" in the north of England is
pronounced "guest," and the name is thought to be _burh-ghest_,
"town-ghost." Others explain it as German _Berg-geist_, "mountain demon,"
or _Bar-geist_, "bear-demon," in allusion to its alleged appearance at
times as a bear. The barghest has a kinsman in the _Rongeur d'Os_ of Norman
folklore. A belief in the spectre-hound still lingers in the wild parts of
the north country of England, and in Nidderdale, Yorkshire, nurses frighten
children with its name.

See Wirt Sikes, _British Goblins_ (1880); _Notes and Queries_, first
series, ii. 51; Joseph Ritson, _Fairy Tales_ (Lond. 1831), p. 58;
_Lancashire Folklore_ (1867); Joseph Lucas, _Studies in Nidderdale_
(Pateley Bridge, 1882).