BARING-GOULD, SABINE (1834- ), English novelist, was born at Exeter on the
28th of January 1834. After graduating at Clare College, Cambridge, he
spent some years in travel, and became in 1864 curate of Horbury,
Yorkshire; then perpetual curate of Dalton, in the same county, in 1867;
and in 1871 rector of East Mersea, Essex. On his father's death in 1872 he
inherited the estate of Lew Trenchard, North Devon, where his family had
been settled for nearly three centuries, and he exchanged his Essex living
for the rectory of Lew Trenchard in 1881. He had a ready pen, and began
publishing books on one subject or another--fiction, travel, history,
folk-lore, religion, mythology, from 1854 onwards. His novel _Mehalah_
(1880), the scene of which is laid on the east coast of England, was an
excellent story, and among many others may be mentioned _John Herring_
(1883), a tale of the west country; _Court Royal_ (1886); _Red Spider_
(1887); _The Pennycomequicks_ (1889); _Cheap Jack Zita_ (1893); and _Broom
Squire_ (1896), a Sussex tale. His contributions to the study of
topography, antiquities and folk-lore, while popularly written, were also
full of serious research and real learning, notably his _Book of
Were-wolves_ (1865), _Curious Myths of the Middle Ages_ (1866), _Curious
Survivals_ (1892). He produced at the same time many volumes of sermons and
popular theology, and edited (1871-1873) _The Sacristy_, a quarterly review
of ecclesiastical art and literature.

Living the life of the rapidly disappearing English "squarson," and full of
cultivated interests, especially in humanizing the local village mind, and
investigating and recording the good things of old-time, his many-sided
activities were shown in every direction and his literary facility made his
work known far and wide. His familiarity with the country-side and his
interest in folk-lore were of special utility in recovering and preserving
for publication a large mass of English popular song, and in assisting the
new English movement for studying and appreciating the old national
ballad-music.