BARMECIDES, more accurately BARMAKIDS, a noble Persian family which
attained great power under the Abbasid caliphs. Barmak, the founder of the
family, was a Persian fire-worshipper, and is supposed to have been a
native of Khorasan. According to tradition, his wife was taken for a time
into the harem of Abdallah, brother of Kotaiba the conqueror of Balkh, and
became the mother of Khalid b. Barmak the Barmecide. Barmak subsequently
(about A.D. 736) rebuilt and adorned his native city of Balkh after the
rebellion of Harith. The family prospered, and his grandson Ya[h.]y[=a] b.
Khalid was the vizier of the caliph Mahdi and tutor of Har[=u]n al-Rashid.
His sons Fadl and Ja`far (the Giafar of the _Arabian Nights_) both occupied
high offices under Har[=u]n. The story of their disgrace, though romantic,
is not improbable. Har[=u]n, it is said, found his chief pleasure in the
society of his sister `Abb[=a]sa and Ja`far, and in order that these two
might be with him continuously without breach of etiquette, persuaded them
to contract a purely formal marriage. The conditions were, however, not
observed and Har[=u]n, learning that `Abb[=a]sa had borne a son, caused
Ja`far suddenly to be arrested and beheaded, and the rest of the family
except Mahommed, Ya[h.]y[=a]'s brother, to be imprisoned and deprived of
their property. It is probable, however, that Har[=u]n's anger was caused
to a large extent by the insinuations of his courtiers that he was a mere
puppet in the hands of a powerful family. See further CALIPHATE, section C,
§§ 4, 5.

The expression "Barmecide Feast," to denote an imaginary banquet, is drawn
from one of the tales ("The Barber's Tale of his Sixth Brother") in the
Arabian Nights, in which a series of empty dishes is served up to a hungry
man to test his sense of humour by one of the Barmecides (see edition by
L. C. Smithers, Lond., 1894, vol. i. 317).