BARNBY, SIR JOSEPH (1838-1896), English musical composer and conductor, son
of Thomas Barnby, an organist, was born at York on the 12th of August 1838.
He was a chorister at York minster from the age of seven, was educated at
the Royal Academy of Music under Cipriani Potter and Charles Lucas, and was
appointed in 1862 organist of St Andrew's, Wells Street, London, where he
raised the services to a high degree of excellence. He was conductor of
"Barnby's Choir" from 1864, and in 1871 was appointed, in succession to
Gounod, conductor of the Albert Hall Choral Society, a post he held till
his death. In 1875 he was precentor and director of music at Eton, and in
1892 became principal of the Guildhall School of Music, receiving the
honour of knighthood in July of that year. His works include an oratorio
_Rebekah_, _Ps. xcvii._, many services and anthems, and two hundred and
forty-six hymn-tunes (published in 1897 in one volume), as well as some
part-songs (among them the popular "Sweet and Low"), and some pieces for
the organ. As a conductor he possessed the qualities as well as the defects
of the typical north-countryman; if he was wanting in the higher kind of
imagination or ideality, he infused into those who sang under him something
of his own rectitude and precision. He was largely instrumental in
stimulating the love for Gounod's sacred music among the less educated part
of the London public, although he displayed little practical sympathy with
opera. On the other hand, he organized a remarkable concert performance of
_Parsifal_ at the Albert Hall in London in 1884. He conducted the Cardiff
Festivals of 1892 and 1895. He died in London on the 28th of January 1896,
and after a special service in St Paul's cathedral was buried in Norwood
Cemetery.