BARNUM, PHINEAS TAYLOR (1810-1891), American showman, was born in Bethel,
Connecticut, on the 5th of July 1810, his father being an inn- and
store-keeper. Barnum first started as a store-keeper, and was also
concerned in the lottery mania then prevailing in the United States. After
failing in business, he started in 1829 a weekly paper, _The Herald of
Freedom_, in Danbury; after several libel suits and a prosecution which
resulted in imprisonment, he moved to New York in 1834, and in 1835 began
his career as a showman, with his purchase and exploitation of a coloured
woman, Joyce Heth, reputed to have been the nurse of George Washington, and
to be over a hundred and sixty years old. With this woman and a small
company he made well-advertised and successful tours in America till 1839,
though Joyce Heth died in 1836, when her age was proved to be not more than
seventy. After a period of failure, he purchased Scudder's American Museum,
New York, in 1841; to this he added considerably, and it became one of the
most popular shows in the United States. He made a special hit by the
exhibition, in 1842, of Charles Stratton, the celebrated "General Tom
Thumb" (see DWARF). In 1844 Barnum toured with the dwarf in England. A
remarkable instance of his enterprise was the engagement of Jenny Lind to
sing in America at $1000 a night for one hundred and fifty nights, all
expenses being paid by the _entrepreneur_. The tour began in 1850. Barnum
retired from the show business in 1855, but had to settle with his
creditors in 1857, and began his old career again as showman and museum
proprietor. In 1871 he established the "Greatest Show on Earth," a
travelling amalgamation of circus, menagerie and museum of "freaks," &c.
This show, incorporated in the name of "Barnum, Bailey & Hutchinson," and
later as "Barnum & Bailey's" toured all over the world. In 1907 the
business was sold to Ringling Brothers. Barnum wrote several books, such as
_The Humbugs of the World_ (1865), _Struggles and Triumphs_ (1869), and his
_Autobiography_ (1854, and later editions). He died on the 7th of April
1891.