BARNETT, JOHN (1802-1890), English musical composer, son of a Prussian
named Bernhard Beer, who changed his name on settling in England as a
jeweller, was born at Bedford, and at the age of eleven sang on the Lyceum
stage in London. His good voice led to his being given a musical education,
and he soon began writing songs and lighter pieces for the stage. In 1834
he published a collection of _Lyrical Illustrations of the Modern Poets_,
His _Mountain Sylph_--with which his name is chiefly connected--received a
warm welcome when produced at the Lyceum on August 25, 1834, as the first
modern English opera: and it was followed by another opera _Fair Rosamund_
in 1837, and by _Farinelli_ in 1839. He had a large connexion as a
singing-master at Cheltenham, and published _Systems and Singing-masters_
(1842) and _School for the Voice_ (1844). He died on the 16th of April
1890.

His nephew, JOHN FRANCIS BARNETT (1837- ), son of John's brother, Joseph
Alfred, also a professor of music, carried on the traditions of the family
as a composer and teacher. He obtained a queen's scholarship at the Royal
Academy of Music, and developed into an accomplished pianist, visiting
Germany to study in 1857 and playing at a Gewandhaus concert at Leipzig in
1860. He came into notice as a composer with his symphony in A minor
(1864), and followed this with a number of compositions for orchestra,
strings or pianoforte. His cantata _The Ancient Mariner_ was brought out at
Birmingham in 1867, and another, _Paradise and the Peri_, in 1870, both
with great success. In 1873 his most important work, the oratorio _The
Raising of Lazarus_, was written, and in 1876 produced at Hereford. Many
other cantatas, pianoforte pieces, &c. were composed by him, and
successfully brought out; and he took an active part as a professor in the
work of the Guildhall School of Music and Royal College of Music.