BARNES, BARNABE (1569?-1609), English poet, fourth son of Dr Richard
Barnes, bishop of Durham, was born in Yorkshire, perhaps at Stonegrave, a
living of his father's, in 1568 or 1569. In 1586 he was entered at
Brasenose College, Oxford, where Giovanni Florio was his servitor, and in
1591 went to France with the earl of Essex, who was then serving against
the prince of Parma. On his return he published _Parthenophil and
Parthenophe, Sonnettes, Madrigals, Elegies and Odes_ (ent. on Stationers'
Register 1593), dedicated to his "dearest friend," William Percy, who
contributed a sonnet to the eulogies prefixed to a later work, _Offices_.
_Parthenophil_ was possibly printed for private circulation, and the copy
in the duke of Devonshire's library is believed to be unique. Barnes was
well acquainted with the work of contemporary French sonneteers, to whom he
is largely indebted, and he borrows his title, apparently, from a
Neapolitan writer of Latin verse, Hieronymus Angerianus. It is possible to
outline a story from this series of love lyrics, but the incidents are
slight, and in this case, as in other Elizabethan sonnet-cycles, it is
difficult to dogmatize as to what is the expression of a real personal
experience, and what is intellectual exercise in imitation of Petrarch.
_Parthenophil_ abounds in passages of great freshness and beauty, although
its elaborate conceits are sometimes over-ingenious and strained. Barnes
took the part of Gabriel Harvey and even experimented in classical metres.
This partisanship is sufficient to account for the abuse of Thomas Nashe,
who accused him, apparently on no proof at all, of stealing a nobleman's
chain at Windsor, and of other things. Barnes's second work, _A Divine
Centurie of Spirituall Sonnetts_, appeared in 1595. He also wrote two
plays:--_The Divil's Charter_ (1607), a tragedy dealing with the life of
Pope Alexander VI., which was played before the king; and _The Battle of
Evesham_ (or Hexham), of which the MS., traced to the beginning of the 18th
century, is lost. In 1606 he dedicated to King James _Offices enabling
privat Persons for the speciall service of all good Princes and Policies_,
a prose treatise containing, among other things, descriptions of Queen
Elizabeth and of the earl of Essex. Barnes was buried at Durham in December
1609.

His _Parthenophil_ and _Spirituall Sonnetts_ were edited by Dr A. B.
Grosart in a limited issue in 1875; _Parthenophil_ was included by Prof. E.
Arber in vol. v. of _An English Garner_; see also the new edition of _An
English Garner_ (_Elizabethan Sonnets_, ed. S. Lee, 1904, pp. lxxv. et
seq.). Professor E. Dowden contributed a sympathetic criticism of Barnes to
_The Academy_ of Sept. 2, 1876.