BARNACLE, a name applied to Crustacea of the division _Cirripedia_ or
_Thyrostraca_. Originally, the name was given to the stalked barnacles
(_Lepadidae_ of C. Darwin), which attach themselves in great numbers to
drift-wood and other objects floating in the sea and are one of the chief
agents in the fouling of ships' bottoms during long voyages. The sessile
barnacles (_Balanidae_ of Darwin) or "acorn-shells" are found in myriads,
encrusting the rocks between tide-marks on all coasts. One of the most
extraordinary and persistent myths of medieval natural history, dating back
to the 12th century at least, was the cause of transferring to these
organisms the name of the barnack or bernacle goose (_Bernicla branta_).
This bird is a winter visitor to Britain, and its Arctic nesting-places
being then unknown, it was fabled to originate within the shell-like fruit
of a tree growing by the sea-shore. In some variants of the story this
shell is said to grow as a kind of mushroom on rotting timber in the sea,
and is obviously one of the barnacles of the genus _Lepas_. Even after the
scientific study of zoology had replaced the fabulous tales of medieval
writers, it was a long time before the true affinities of the barnacles
were appreciated, and they were at first classed with the Mollusca, some of
which they closely resemble in external appearance. It was not till Vaughan
Thompson demonstrated, in 1830, their development from a free-swimming and
typically Crustacean larva that it came to be recognized that, in Huxley's
graphic phrase, "a barnacle may be said to be a Crustacean fixed by its
head and kicking the food into its mouth with its legs." For a systematic
account of the barnacles and their allies, see the article THYROSTRACA.

(W. T. CA.)