BARNARD, FREDERICK AUGUSTUS PORTER (1809-1889), American scientist and
educationalist, was born in Sheffield, Massachusetts, on the 5th of May
1809. In 1828 he graduated, second on the honour list, at Yale. He was then
in turn a tutor at Yale, a teacher (1831-1832) in the American Asylum for
the [v.03 p.0410] Deaf and Dumb at Hartford, Connecticut, and a teacher
(1832-1838) in the New York Institute for the Instruction of the Deaf and
Dumb. From 1838 to 1848 he was professor of mathematics and natural
philosophy, and from 1848 to 1854 was professor of chemistry and natural
history in the University of Alabama, for two years, also, filling the
chair of English literature. In 1854 he was ordained as deacon in the
Protestant Episcopal Church. In the same year he became professor of
mathematics and natural philosophy in the University of Mississippi, of
which institution he was chancellor from 1856 until the outbreak of the
Civil War, when, his sympathies being with the North, he resigned and went
to Washington. There for some time he was in charge of the map and chart
department of the United States Coast Survey. In 1864 he became the tenth
president of Columbia College (now Columbia University) in New York City,
which position he held until the year before his death, his service thus
being longer than that of any of his predecessors. During this period the
growth of the college was rapid; new departments were established; the
elective system was greatly extended; more adequate provision was made for
graduate study and original research, and the enrolment was increased from
about 150 to more than 1000 students. Barnard strove to have educational
privileges extended by the university to women as well as to men, and
Barnard College, for women (see COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY), established
immediately after his death, was named in his honour. He died in New York
City on the 27th of April 1889. Barnard was a versatile man, of catholic
training, a classical and English scholar, a mathematician, a physicist,
and a chemist, a good public speaker, and a vigorous but somewhat prolix
writer on various subjects, his annual reports to the Board of Trustees of
Columbia being particularly valuable as discussions of educational
problems. Besides being the editor-in-chief, in 1872, of _Johnson's
Universal Cyclopaedia_, he published a _Treatise on Arithmetic_ (1830); an
_Analytical Grammar with Symbolic Illustration_ (1836); _Letters on
Collegiate Government_ (1855); and _Recent Progress in Science_ (1869).

See John Fulton's _Memoirs of Frederick A. P. Barnard_ (New York, 1896).