BARNES, ALBERT (1798-1870), American theologian, was born at Rome, New
York, on the 1st of December 1798. He graduated at Hamilton College,
Clinton, N.Y., in 1820, and at the Princeton Theological Seminary in 1823,
was ordained as a Presbyterian minister by the presbytery of Elizabethtown,
New Jersey, in 1825, and was the pastor successively of the Presbyterian
Church in Morristown, New Jersey (1825-1830) and of the First Presbyterian
Church of Philadelphia (1830-1867). He held a prominent place in the New
School branch of the Presbyterians, to which he adhered on the division of
the denomination in 1837; he had been tried (but not convicted) for heresy
in 1836, the charge being particularly against the views expressed by him
in _Notes_ on Romans (1835) of the imputation of the sin of Adam, original
sin and the atonement; the bitterness stirred up by this trial contributed
towards widening the breach between the conservative and the progressive
elements in the church. He was an eloquent preacher, but his reputation
rests chiefly on his expository works, which are said to have had a larger
circulation both in Europe and America than any others of their class. Of
the well-known _Notes on the New Testament_ it is said that more than a
million volumes had been issued by 1870. The _Notes_ on Job, the Psalms,
Isaiah and Daniel, found scarcely less acceptance. Displaying no original
critical power, their chief merit lies in the fact that they bring in a
popular (but not always accurate) form the results of the criticism of
others within the reach of general readers. Barnes was the author of
several other works of a practical and devotional kind, and a collection of
his _Theological Works_ was published in Philadelphia in 1875. He died in
Philadelphia on the 24th of December 1870.