BARON, MICHEL (1653-1729), French actor (whose family name originally was
Boyron), was born in Paris, the son of a leading actor (d. 1655) and of a
talented actress (d. 1662). At the age of twelve he joined the company of
children known as the _Petits Comédiens Dauphins_, of which he was the
brightest star. Molière was delighted with his talent, and with the king's
permission secured him for his own company. In consequence of a
misunderstanding with Molière's wife, the actor withdrew from the
dramatist's company, but rejoined it in 1670, reappearing as Domitien in
Corneille's _Tite et Bérénice_, and in his _Psyche_. He remained in this
company until Molière's death. He then became a member of the company at
the Hôtel de Bourgogne, and from this time until his retirement in 1691 was
undisputed master of the French stage, creating many of the leading rôles
in Racine's tragedies, besides those in two of his own comedies, _L'Homme à
bonnes fortunes_ (1686), and _La Coquette_ (1687). He also wrote _Les
Enlèvements_ (1685), _Le Débauché_ (1689), and translated and acted two
plays of Terence. In 1720 Baron reappeared at the Palais Royal, and his
activity on the stage was renewed in a multitude of parts. He died on the
22nd of December 1729.

His son ÉTIENNE MICHEL BARON (1676-1711) was also a fine actor, and left a
son and two daughters who all played at the Comédie Française.

See George Monval, _Un Comédien amateur d'art_ (1893); also the Abbé
d'Allamial's _Lettres à mylord XXX. sur Baron et la demoiselle Lecouvreur_,
in F. G. J. S. Andrieux's _Collection des mémoires sur l'art dramatique_
(1822).