BARONIUS, CAESAR (1538-1607), Italian cardinal and ecclesiastical
historian, was born at Sora, and was educated at Veroli and Naples. At Rome
he joined the Oratory in 1557 under St Philip Neri (_q.v._) and succeeded
him as superior in 1593. Clement VIII., whose confessor he was, made him
cardinal in 1596 and librarian of the Vatican. At subsequent conclaves he
was twice nearly elected pope, but on each occasion was opposed by Spain on
account of his work _On the Monarchy of Sicily_, in which he supported the
papal claims against those of the Spanish government. Baronius is best
known by his _Annales Ecclesiastici_, undertaken by the order of St Philip
as an answer to the _Magdeburg Centuries_. After nearly thirty years of
lecturing on the history of the Church at the Vallicella and being trained
by St Philip as a great man for a great work, he began to write, and
produced twelve folios (1588-1607). In the _Annales_ he treats history in
strict chronological order and keeps theology in the background. In spite
of many errors, especially in Greek history, in which he had to depend upon
secondhand information, the work of Baronius stands as an honest attempt to
write history, marked with a sincere love of truth. Sarpi, in urging
Casaubon to write against Baronius, warns him never to charge or suspect
him of bad faith, for no one who knew him could accuse him of disloyalty to
truth. Baronius makes use of the words of St Augustine: "I shall love with
a special love the man who most rigidly and severely corrects my errors."
He also undertook a new edition to the Roman martyrology (1586), which he
purified of many inaccuracies.

His _Annales_, which end in 1198, were continued by Rinaldi (9 vols.,
1676-1677); by Laderchi (3 vols., 1728-1737); and by Theiner (3 vols.,
1856). The most useful edition is that of Mansi (38 vols., Lucca,
1738-1759), giving Pagi's corrections at the foot of each page.

(E. TN.)