BARRY, SIR REDMOND (1813-1880), British colonial judge, son of
Major-General H. G. Barry, of Ballyclough, Co. Cork, was educated at a
military school in Kent, and at Trinity College, Dublin, and was called to
the Irish bar in 1838. He emigrated to Australia, and after a short stay at
Sydney went to Melbourne, with which city he was ever afterwards closely
identified. After practising his profession for some years, he became
commissioner of the court of requests, and after the creation in 1851 of
the colony of Victoria, out of the Port Phillip district of New South
Wales, was the first solicitor-general with a seat in the legislative and
executive councils. Subsequently he held the offices of judge of the
Supreme Court, acting chief-justice and administrator of the government. He
represented Victoria at the London International Exhibition of 1862 and at
the Philadelphia Exhibition of 1876. He was knighted in 1860 and was
created K.C.M.G. in 1877. Sir Redmond Barry was the first person in
Victoria to take an interest in higher education, and induced the local
government to expend large sums of money upon that object. He was the
founder of the university of Melbourne (1853), of which he was the first
chancellor, was president of the Melbourne public library (1854), national
gallery and museum, and was one of the first to foster the volunteer
movement in Australia. To his exertions is due the prosperity of the two
institutions with which his memory is identified.