BARREL-ORGAN (Eng. "grinder-organ," "street-organ," "hand-organ," "Dutch
organ"; Fr. _orgue de Barbarie_, _orgue d'Allemagne_, _orgue mécanique_,
_cabinet d'orgue_, _serinette_; Ger. _Drehorgel_, _Leierkasten_; Ital.
_organetto a manovella_, _organo tedesco_), a small portable organ
mechanically played by turning a handle. The barrel-organ owes its name to
the cylinder on which the tunes are pricked out with pins and staples of
various lengths, set at definite intervals according to the scheme required
by the music. The function of these pins and staples is to raise balanced
keys connected by simple mechanism with the valves of the pipes, which are
thus mechanically opened, admitting the stream of air from the wind-chest.
The handle attached to the shaft sets the cylinder in slow rotation by
means of a worm working in a fine-toothed gear on the barrel-head; the same
motion works the bellows by means of cranks and connecting rods on the
shaft. The wind is thereby forced into a reservoir, whence it passes into
the wind-chest, on the sides of which are grouped the pipes. The barrel
revolves slowly from back to front, each revolution as a rule playing one
complete tune. A notch-pin in the barrelhead, furnished with as many
notches as there are tunes, enables the performer to shift the barrel and
change the tune. The ordinary street barrel-organ had a compass varying
from 24 to 34 notes, forming a diatonic scale with a few accidentals,
generally F#, G#, C#. There were usually two stops, one for the open pipes
of metal, the other for the closed wooden pipes. Barrel-organs [v.03
p.0433] have been made with as many as three or four cylinders set in a
circular revolving frame, but these more elaborate instruments were mainly
used in churches[1] and chapels, a purpose for which they were in great
demand for playing hymns, chants and voluntaries during the 18th and early
19th centuries. A barrel-organ was built for Fulham church by Wright, and a
large instrument with four barrels was constructed by Bishop for
Northallerton church in 1820.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Large stationary barrel-organ worked by hydraulic
power, from Solomon de Caus, _Les Raisons des forces mouvantes_
(Frankfort-on-Main, 1615).]

The origin of the barrel-organ is now clearly established, and many will
doubtless be surprised to find that it must be sought in the Netherlands as
early as the middle of the 15th century, and that accurate and detailed
diagrams of every part of the mechanism for a large stationary barrel-organ
worked by hydraulic power were published in 1615. There are letters patent
preserved in the archives of Belgium appointing a certain organ-builder,
Jehan van Steenken, _dit_ Aren, "Master of organs which play of
themselves"; in the original Flemish _Meester van orgelen spelende bij hen
selven_.[2] This organ was not a portable one like English street organs,
but a more imposing instrument, as we learn from other documents giving a
detailed account of the moneys paid to Maistre Jehan for conveying the
organs from Bruges to Brussels.[3] Steenken was, by virtue of the same
letters patent, awarded an annual pension of fifty Rhenish florins in
consideration of the services rendered to the duke of Burgundy, and on
condition of his submitting to his liege Philip the Good all other
instruments he might make in the future. There is nothing singular in the
early date of this invention, for the 15th century was distinguished for
the extraordinary impulse which the patronage and appreciation of the dukes
of Burgundy gave to automatic contrivances of all kinds, carillons, clocks,
speaking animals and other curiosities due to Flemish genius.[4] No
contemporary illustration is forthcoming, but in 1615 Solomon de Caus, who
avowedly owed his inspiration to Hero and Vitruvius, describes a number of
hydraulic machines, amongst which is the barrel-organ,[5] illustrating his
description by means of several large drawings and diagrams very carefully
carried out. De Caus' organ, entitled "Machine par laquelle l'on fera
sonner un jeu d'orgues par le moyen de l'eau," was built up on a wall a
foot thick. In the illustrations the barrel is shown to be divided into
bars, and each bar into eight beats for the quavers. The whole drum is
pierced with holes at the intersecting points, the pins being movable, so
that when the performer grew tired of one tune, he could re-arrange the
pins to form another. The four bellows are set in motion by means of ropes
strained over pulleys and attached to four cranks on the rotating shaft.
Solomon de Caus lays no claim to the invention of this organ, but only to
the adaptation of hydraulic power for revolving the drum; on the contrary,
in a dissertation on the invention of hydraulic machines and organs, he
states that there was evidently some difference between the organs of the
ancients and those of his day, since there is no mention in the classics of
any musical wheel by means of which tunes could be played in several
parts--the ancients, indeed, seem to have used their fingers on the
keyboard to sound their organs. The eighteen keys drawn in one diagram bear
names, beginning at the left, D, C, B, A, G, F, F#, E, D, C, B, A, G, F, E,
D, C, B; De Caus states that only half the keyboard is given for want of
space; the compass, therefore, probably was as shown, with a few
accidentals. [Notation: D6 to D2.] A barrel-organ, also worked by hydraulic
power, is somewhat fantastically drawn by Robert Fludd in a work[6]
published two years after that of Solomon de Caus. This diagram is of no
value except as a curiosity, for the author betrays a very imperfect
knowledge of the mechanical principles involved. The piece of music
actually set on de Caus' barrel-organ, six bars of which can be made
out,[7] consists of a madrigal, "Chi fara fed' al ciel," by Alessandro
Striggio, written in organ tablature by Peter Philips, organist of the
Chapel Royal, Brussels, at the end of the 16th century.[8] A French
barrel-organ[9] in the collection of the Brussels Conservatoire, bearing
the date "5 Mars 1797," has the following compass with flats, beginning at
the left:--

[Illustration]

Other evidences of the origin of the barrel-organ are not wanting. The
inventory of the organs and other keyboard instruments belonging to the
duke of Modena, drawn up in 1598, contains two entries of an _organo
Tedesco_.[10] In England these organs were also known as "Dutch organs,"
and the name clung to the instrument even in its diminutive form of
hand-organ of the itinerant musician. In Jedediah Morse's description of
the [v.03 p.0434] manners and customs of the Netherlands,[11] we find the
following allusion:--"The diversions of the Dutch differ not much from
those of the English, who seem to have borrowed from them the neatness of
their drinking booths, skittle and other grounds ... which form the
amusements of the middle ranks, not to mention their hand-organs and other
musical inventions." An illustration of the hand-organ of that period is
given in Knight's _London_[12] being one of a collection of street views
published by Dayes in 1789. In a description of Bartholomew Fair, as held
at the beginning of the 18th century, is a further reference to the Dutch
origin of the barrel-organ:--"A band at the west-end of the town, well
known for playing on winter evenings before Spring Garden Coffee House,
opposite Wigley's great exhibition room, consisted of a double drum, a
Dutch organ, the tambourine, violin, pipes and the Turkish jingle used in
the army. This band was generally hired at one of the booths of the
fair."[13] Mr Thomas Brown relates that one Mr Stephens, a _Poultry_
author, proposed to parliament for any one that should presume to keep an
organ in a Publick House to be fined £20 and made incapable of being an
ale-draper for the future.[14] In 1737 Horace Walpole writes[15]:--"I am
now in pursuit of getting the finest piece of music that ever was heard; it
is a thing that will play eight tunes. Handel and all the great musicians
say that it is beyond anything they can do, and this may be performed by
the most ignorant person, and when you are weary of those eight tunes, you
may have them changed for any other that you like." The organ was put in a
lottery and fetched £1000.

There was a very small barrel-organ in use during the 18th and 19th
centuries, known as the bird-organ (Fr. _serinette_, _turlutaine_,
_merline_). One of these now in the collection of the Brussels
Conservatoire is described by V. C. Mahillon.[16] The instrument is in the
form of a book, on the back of which is the title "_Le chant des oiseaux,
Tome vi._" There are ten pewter stopped pipes giving the scale of G with
the addition of Fb and A two octaves higher. [Notation: G4 A5.] The whole
instrument measures approximately 8 × 5½ × 2¾ in. and plays eight tunes.
Mozart wrote an _Andante_[17] for a small barrel-organ.

For an illustration of the construction of the barrel-organ during the 18th
century, consult P. M. D. J. Engramelle, _La Tonotechnie ou l'art de noter
les cylindres et tout ce qui est susceptible de notage dans les instruments
de concerts méchaniques_ (Paris, 1775), with engravings (not in the British
Museum); and for a clear diagram of the modern instrument the article on
"Automatic Appliances connected with Music," by Dr. E. J. Hopkins, in
Grove's _Dictionary of Music and Musicians_, vol. i. (1904), p. 134.

(K. S.)

[1] This practice had evidently not been adopted in Germany, as the
following instance will show. The use of barrel-organs (_Drehorgeln_) in
country churches was seriously recommended by an anonymous writer in two
German papers at the beginning of the 19th century (_Beobachter an der
Spree_, Berlin, 22nd October 1821, and in _Markische Boten_, Nos. 138 and
139, 1821). The organist Wilke of Leipzig published in reply an article in
the _Allgem. musik. Zeitung_ (1822, pp. 777 et seq.) in which "he very
properly repudiated such a laughable recommendation."

[2] _Archives générales du royaume de Belgique, Chambre des Comptes_, No.
2, 449 r^o. cf. 52 r^o.; and Edmund van der Straeten, _La Musique aux
Pays-Bas_, vol. vii. pp. 230-232.

[3] Van der Straeten, _op. cit._ p. 299.

[4] Van der Straeten, _op. cit._ p. 231.

[5] Solomon de Caus, _Les Raisons des forces mouvantes_ (Frankfort, 1615),
problems 25, 28, 29, 30.

[6] _Historia utriusque cosmi_ (Oppenheim, 1617), t. i., experimentum viii.
p. 483.

[7] _Op. cit._ problem 29 shows the arrangement of the bellows for the
wind-supply. In problem 30 is drawn a large section of the barrel, showing
six bars of music represented by the pin tablature, which can be actually
deciphered by the help of the keyboard included in the drawing. These
diagrams are admirably clear and of real technical value. A copy of this
work is in the library of the British Museum.

[8] See also E. van der Straeten, who has translated Philips' setting into
modern notation, _op. cit._ t. vi. pp. 506 and 510.

[9] See V. C. Mahillon, _Catalogue descriptif_ (Brussels, 1896), No. 1137,
p. 371.

[10] _Tedesco_ was applied by Italians to both German and Dutch. Count
Valdrighi, _Musurgiana I. Serandola, Pianoforte, Salterio_ (Modena, 1879),
pp. 27 and 28; and E. van der Straeten, _op. cit._ vol. vi. p. 122.

[11] Jedediah Morse _American Geography_, part ii. p. 334 (Boston, Mass.,
1796).

[12] Knight's _London_, vol. i. p. 144.

[13] Hone's _Every Day Book_, i. p. 1248.

[14] _Collection of all the Dialogues written by Mr Thomas Brown_ (London,
1704), p. 297.

[15] Hone's _Every Day Book_, ii. pp. 1452-1453.

[16] See _Catalogue descriptif_ (Ghent, 1880), Nos. 461 and 462.

[17] Breitkopf and Härtel's _Critically revised edition of Mozart's Works_,
series x. no. 10.