BARRACKPUR, a town and magisterial subdivision of British India, in the
district of Twenty-four Parganas, Bengal. The town is the largest
cantonment in Lower Bengal, having accommodation for two batteries of
artillery, the wing of a European regiment and two native battalions. Its
name is said to be derived from the fact of troops having been stationed
here since 1772. It is a station on the Eastern Bengal railway. Job [v.03
p.0427] Charnock, the founder of Calcutta, erected a bungalow and
established a small bazaar here in 1689. The cantonment is situated on the
left bank of the Hugli; it has also a large bazaar and several large tanks,
and also a parade ground. To the south of the cantonment is situated the
park, created by the taste and public spirit of Lord Wellesley. Within the
park is situated the Government House, a noble building begun by Lord
Minto, and enlarged into its present state by the marquess of Hastings. The
park is beautifully laid out, and contains a small menagerie. Its most
interesting feature is now Lady Canning's tomb. Barrackpur played an
important part in the two Sepoy mutinies of 1824 and 1857, but the details
of these belong to the general history of British rule in India. North
Barrackpur had a population in 1901 of 12,600 and south Barrackpur of
19,307.

Barrackpur subdivision was formed in 1904. It contains an area of 190 sq.
m., which, at the census of 1901, had a population of 206,311, a large
proportion being workers in the mills on the left bank of the Hugli.