BARRIE, JAMES MATTHEW (1860- ), British novelist and dramatist, was born at
Kirriemuir, a small village in Forfarshire, on the 9th of May 1860. He was
educated at the Dumfries academy and Edinburgh University. He has told us
in his quasi-autobiographical _Margaret Ogilvy_ that he wrote tales in the
garret before he went to school, and at Edinburgh wrote the greater part of
a three-volume novel, which a publisher presumed was the work of a clever
lady and offered to publish for £100. The offer was not accepted, and it
was through journalism that he found his way to literature. After a short
period of waiting in Edinburgh, he became leader-writer on the _Nottingham
Journal_ in February 1883. To this paper he contributed also special
articles and notes, which provided an opening and training for his personal
talent. He soon began to submit articles to London editors, and on the 17th
of November 1884 Mr Frederick Greenwood printed in the _St James's Gazette_
his article on "An Auld Licht Community." With the encouragement of this
able editor, more Auld Licht "Idylls" followed; and in 1885 Mr Barrie moved
to London. He continued to write for the _St James's Gazette_ and for _Home
Chimes_ (edited by Mr F. W. Robinson). He was soon enlisted by Mr Alexander
Riach for the _Edinburgh Evening Dispatch_, which in turn led to his
writing (over the signature "Gavin Ogilvy ") for Dr Robertson Nicoll's
_British Weekly_. Later he became a contributor to the _Scots_ (afterwards
_National_) _Observer_, edited by W. E. Henley, and also to the _Speaker_,
upon its foundation in 1890. In 1887 he published his first book, _Better
Dead_. It was a mere _jeu d'esprit_, a specimen of his humorous journalism,
elaborated from the _St James's Gazette_. This was followed in 1888 by
_Auld Licht Idylls_, a collection of the Scots village sketches written for
the same paper. They portrayed the life and humours of his native village,
idealized as "Thrums," and were the fruits of early observation and of his
mother's tales. "She told me everything," Mr Barrie has written, "and so my
memories of our little red town were coloured by her memories." Kirriemuir
itself was not wholly satisfied with the portrait, but "Thrums" took its
place securely on the literary map of the world. In the same year he
published _An Edinburgh Eleven_, sketches from the _British Weekly_ of
eminent Edinburgh students; also his first long story, _When a Man's
Single_, a humorous transcription of his experiences as journalist,
particularly in the Nottingham office. The book was introduced by what was
in fact another Thrums "Idyll," on a higher level than the rest of the
book. In 1889 came _A Window in Thrums_. This beautiful book, and the
_Idylls_, gave the full measure of Mr Barrie's gifts of humanity, humour
and pathos, with abundant evidence of the whimsical turn of his wit, and of
his original and vernacular style. In 1891 he made a collection of his
lighter papers from the _St James's Gazette_ and published them as _My Lady
Nicotine_. In 1891 appeared his first long novel, _The Little Minister_,
which had been first published serially in _Good Words_. It introduced, not
with unmixed success, extraneous elements, including the winsome heroine
Babbie, into the familiar life of Thrums, but proved the author's
possession of a considerable gift of romance. In 1894 he published
_Margaret Ogilvy_, based on the life of his mother and his own relations
with her, most tenderly conceived and beautifully written, though too
intimate for the taste of many. The book is full of revelations of great
interest to admirers of Mr Barrie's genius. The following year came
_Sentimental Tommy_, a story tracing curiously the psychological
development of the "artistic temperament" in a Scots lad of the people.
R. L. Stevenson supposed himself to be portrayed in the hero, but it may be
safely assumed that the author derived his material largely from
introspection. The story was completed by a sequel, _Tommy and Grizel_,
published in 1900. The effect of this story was somewhat marred by the
comparative failure of the scenes in society remote from Thrums. In 1902 he
published _The Little White Bird_, a pretty fantasy, wherein he gave full
play to his whimsical invention, and his tenderness for child life, which
is relieved by the genius of sincerity from a suspicion of mawkishness.
This book contained the episode of "Peter Pan," which afterwards suggested
the play of that name. In the meantime Mr Barrie had been developing his
talent as a dramatist. In 1892 Mr Toole had made a great success at his own
theatre of Barrie's _Walker, London_, a farce founded on a sketch in _When
a Man's Single_. In 1893 Mr Barrie married Miss Ansell (divorced in 1909),
who had acted in _Walker, London_. In this year he wrote, with Sir A. Conan
Doyle, a play called _Jane Annie_. He found more success, however, in _The
Professor's Love-Story_ in 1895; and in 1897 the popularity of his
dramatized version of _The Little Minister_ probably confirmed him in a
predilection for drama, evident already in some of his first sketches in
the _Nottingham Journal_. In 1900 Mr Bourchier produced _The Wedding
Guest_, which was printed as a supplement to the _Fortnightly Review_ in
December of the same year. After the publication of _The Little White
Bird_, Mr Barrie burst upon the town as a popular and prolific playwright.
The struggling journalist of the early 'nineties had now become one of the
most prosperous literary men of the day. In 1903 no fewer than three plays
from his hand held the stage--_Quality Street_, _The Admirable [v.03
p.0436] Crichton_ and _Little Mary_. The year 1904 produced _Peter Pan_, a
kind of poetical pantomime, in which the author found scope for some of his
most characteristic and permanently delightful gifts. In 1905
_Alice-Sit-by-the-Fire_ and in 1908 _What Every Woman Knows_ were added to
the list. As dramatist Mr Barrie brought, to a sphere rather ridden by
convention, a method wholly unconventional and a singularly fresh fancy,
seasoned by a shrewd touch of satirical humour; and in _Peter Pan_ he
proved himself a Hans Andersen of the stage. In literature, the success of
"Thrums" produced a crop of imitations, christened in derision by W. E.
Henley the "Kailyard School," though the imitations were by no means
confined to Scotland. In this school the _Auld Licht Idylls_ and _A Window
in Thrums_ remained unsurpassed and unapproached. The Scots village tale
was no novelty in literature--witness John Gait, the _Chronicles of
Carlingford_ and George MacDonald. Yet Mr Barrie, in spite of a dialect not
easy to the Southron, contrived to touch a more intimate and more
responsive chord. With the simplest materials he achieved an almost
unendurable pathos, which yet is never forced; and the pathos is salted
with humour, while about the moving homeliness of his humanity play the
gleams of a whimsical wit. Stevenson, in a letter to Mr Henry James, in
December 1892, said justly of Barrie that "there was genius in him, but
there was a journalist on his elbow." This genius found its most perfect
and characteristic expression in the humanity of "Thrums" and the bizarre
and tender fantasy of _Peter Pan_.

See also _J. M. Barrie and His Books_, by J. A. Hamerton (Horace Marshall,
1902); and for bibliography up to May 1903, _English Illustrated Magazine_,
vol. xxix. (N.S.), p. 208.

(W. P. J.)