BARRINGTON, DAINES (1727-1800), English lawyer, antiquary and naturalist,
was born in 1727, fourth son of the first Viscount Barrington. He was
educated for the profession of the law, and after filling various posts,
was appointed a Welsh judge in 1757 and afterwards second justice of
Chester. Though an indifferent judge, his _Observations on the Statutes,
chiefly the more ancient, from Magna Charta to 21st James I., cap. 27, with
an appendix, being a proposal for new-modelling the Statutes_ (1766), had a
high reputation among historians and constitutional antiquaries. In 1773 he
published an edition of Orosius, with Alfred's Saxon version, and an
English translation with original notes. His _Tracts on the Probability of
reaching the North Pole_ (1775) were written in consequence of the northern
voyage of discovery undertaken by Captain C. J. Phipps, afterwards Lord
Mulgrave (1744-1792). Barrington's other writings are chiefly to be found
in the publications of the Royal and Antiquarian Societies, of both of
which he was long a member, and of the latter vice-president. Many of these
were collected by him in a quarto volume entitled _Miscellanies on various
Subjects_ (1781). He contributed to the _Philosophical Transactions_ for
1780 an account of Mozart's visit at eight years of age to London. In his
_Miscellanies_ on varied subjects he included this with accounts of four
other prodigies, namely, Crotch, Charles and Samuel Wesley, and Garrett
Wellesley, Lord Mornington. Among the most curious and ingenious of his
papers are his _Experiments and Observations on the Singing of Birds_, and
his _Essay on the Language of Birds_. He died on the 14th of March 1800 and
was buried in the Temple church.