BARRÈS, MAURICE (1862- ), French novelist and politician, was born at
Charmes (Vosges) on the 22nd of September 1862; he was educated at the
_lycée_ of Nancy, and in 1883 went to Paris to continue his legal studies.
He was already a contributor to the monthly periodical, _Jeune France_, and
he now issued a periodical of his own, _Les Taches d'encre_, which survived
for a few months only. After four years of journalism he went to Italy,
where he wrote _Sous l'oeil des barbares_ (1888), the first volume of a
_trilogie du moi_, completed by _Un Homme libre_ (1889), and _Le Jardin de
Bérénice_ (1891). He divided the world into _moi_ and the barbarians, the
latter including all those antipathetic to the writer's individuality.
These apologies for individualism were supplemented by _L'Ennemi des lois_
(1892), and an admirable volume of impressions of travel, _Du sang, de la
volupté et de la mort_ (1893). His early books are written in an elaborate
style and are often very obscure. Barrès carried his theory of
individualism into politics as an ardent partisan of General Boulanger. He
directed a Boulangist paper at Nancy, and was elected deputy in 1889,
retaining his seat in the legislature until 1893. His play, _Une Journée
parlementaire_, was produced at the Comédie Française in 1894. In 1897 he
began his trilogy, _Le Roman de l'énergie nationale_, with the publication
of _Les Déracinés_. The series is a plea for local patriotism, and for the
preservation of the distinctive qualities of the old French provinces. The
first narrates the adventures of seven young Lorrainers, who set out to
conquer fortune in Paris. Six of them survive in the second novel of the
trilogy, _L'Appel au soldat_ (1900), which gives the history of Boulangism;
the sequel, _Leurs figures_ (1902), deals with the Panama scandals. Later
works are:--_Scènes et doctrines du nationalisme_ (1902); _Les Amitiés
françaises_ (1903), in which he urges the inculcation of patriotism by the
early study of national history; _Ce que j'ai vu à Rennes_ (1904); _Au
service de l'Allemagne_ (1905), the experiences of an Alsatian conscript in
a German regiment; _Le Voyage de Sparte_ (1906). M. Barrès was admitted to
the French Academy in 1906.

See also R. Doumic, _Les Jeunes_ (1896); J. Lionnet, _L'Évolution des
idees_ (1903); Anatole France, _La Vie littéraire_ (4th series, 1892).