BARRINGTON, JOHN SHUTE, 1ST VISCOUNT (1678-1734), English lawyer and
theologian, was the son of Benjamin Shute, merchant, and was born at
Theobalds, in Hertfordshire, in 1678. He received part of his education at
the university of Utrecht; and, after returning to England in 1698, studied
law in the Inner Temple. In 1701 he published several pamphlets in favour
of the civil rights of Protestant dissenters, to which class he belonged.
On the recommendation of Lord Somers he was employed to induce the
Presbyterians in Scotland to favour the union of the two kingdoms, and in
1708 he was rewarded for this service by being appointed to the office of
commissioner of the customs. From this, however, he was removed on the
change of administration in 1711; but his fortune had, in the meantime,
been improved by the bequest of two considerable estates,--one of them left
him by Francis Barrington of Tofts, whose name he assumed by act of
parliament, the other by John Wildman of Becket. Barrington now stood at
the head of the dissenters. On the accession of George I. he was returned
to parliament for Berwick-upon-Tweed; and in 1720 the king raised him to
the Irish peerage, with the title of Viscount Barrington of Ardglass. But
having unfortunately engaged in the Harburg lottery, one of the bubble
speculations of the time, he was expelled from the House of Commons in
1723,--a punishment which was considered much too severe, and was thought
to be due to personal malice of Walpole. In 1725 he published his principal
work, entitled _Miscellanea Sacra or a New Method of considering so much of
the History of the Apostles as is contained in Scripture_, 2 vols.
8vo,--afterwards reprinted with additions and corrections, in 3 vols. 8vo,
1770, by his son Shute. In the same year he published _An Essay on the
Several Dispensations of God to Mankind_. He died on the 14th of December
1734.