BARTLETT, JOHN RUSSELL (1805-1886), American historical and linguistic
student, was born in Providence, Rhode Island, on the 23rd of October 1805.
From his first to his eighteenth year he lived in Kingston, Canada; he was
then in turn, from 1824 to 1836, a clerk in a dry goods store, a
book-keeper and a bank cashier at Providence, and for more than ten years
after 1836 he was a bookseller in New York City, returning to Providence in
1850. In 1850-1853 he was the commissioner on the part of the United States
for the survey of the boundary between the United States and Mexico, but
owing to the lack of funds did not finish the work. After being superseded
by another commissioner upon the accession of President Franklin Pierce, he
published _A Personal Narrative of Explorations and Incidents in Texas, New
Mexico, California, Sonora and Chihuahua_ (2 vols., 1854), which contains
much valuable scientific and historical material concerning the south-west.
From 1855 to 1872 he was secretary of state of Rhode Island, and while
serving in this capacity thoroughly re-arranged and classified the state
records, and prepared various bibliographies and compilations, relating
chiefly to the history of the state. He is chiefly remembered however, for
his _Dictionary of Americanisms_ (1848), a pioneer work, which, although
later dialect changes have, of course, deprived it of completeness or final
authoritativeness, is still of value to students of language and remains
the chief contribution to the subject. He died in Providence on the 28th of
May 1886.