BARTHÉLEMY, ANATOLE JEAN-BAPTISTE ANTOINE DE (1821-1904), French
archaeologist and numismatist, was born at Reims on the 1st of July 1821,
and died at Ville d'Avray on the 27th of June 1904. In collaboration with
J. Geslin de Bourgogne he published _Études sur la révolution en Bretagne_
in 1858, and between 1855 and 1879 an exhaustive work in six volumes on the
_Anciens évêchés de Bretagne; histoire et monuments_. In 1880 appeared the
_Choix de documents inédits sur l'histoire de la ligue en Bretagne_, by
himself alone. But it was, above all, his numismatical work which
established his reputation. This included several popular publications,
such as the _Nouveau manuel complet de numismatique ancienne_ (1851; second
edition, revised, 1890), and the _Nouveau manuel complet de numismatique du
moyen âge et moderne_ (1853; new edition revised by Adrien Planchet), and a
large number of monographs and articles in the technical reviews. The
following may be specially mentioned: _Numismatique mérovingienne_ (1865);
_Essai sur la monnaie parisis_ (1874); _Note sur l'origine de la monnaie
tournoise_ (1896); and in the series of instructions issued by the _Comité
des travaux historiques et scientifiques_ he edited the number on _La
Numismatique de la France_ (1891). In 1897 he was elected a member of the
Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-lettres.

His younger brother, ÉDOUARD MARIE, comte de Barthélemy, who was born in
Angers in 1830, has published a number of documents upon the ancient French
nobility and upon the history of Champagne.