BARTON, BERNARD (1784-1849), English poet, was born at Carlisle on the 31st
of January 1784. His parents were Quakers, and he was commonly known as the
Quaker poet. After some experience of business, he became, in 1809, clerk
to Messrs Alexander's bank at Woodbridge, Suffolk, and retained this post
till his death. His first volume of verse--_Metrical Effusions_--was
published in 1812. It brought him into correspondence with Southey, and
shortly afterwards, through the medium of a set of complimentary verses, he
made the acquaintance of Hogg. From this time onwards to 1828 Barton
published various volumes of verse. After 1828 his work appeared but rarely
in print, but his _Household Verses_ published in 1845 secured him, on the
recommendation of Sir Robert Peel, a Civil List pension of £100 a year,
£1200 having already been raised for him by some members of the Society of
Friends. Barton is chiefly remembered for his friendship with Charles Lamb,
which arose, curiously enough, out of a remonstrance addressed by him to
the author of _Essays of Elia_ on the freedom with which the Quakers had
been handled in that volume. When Barton contemplated resigning his bank
clerkship and supporting himself entirely by literature, Lamb strongly
dissuaded him. "Keep to your bank," he wrote, "and the bank will keep you."
Barton died at Woodbridge on 19th February 1849. His daughter Lucy married
Edward FitzGerald.

See _Poems and Letters of Bernard Barton, selected by Lucy Barton, with a
biographical notice by Edward FitzGerald_ (1849).