BARTHOLINUS, GASPARD [CASPAR BERTHELSEN], (1585-1629), physician, was born
in 1585 at Malmö, in Sweden. His precocity was extraordinary; at three
years of age he was able to read, and in his thirteenth year he composed
Greek and Latin orations and delivered them in public. When he was about
eighteen he went to the university of Copenhagen and afterwards studied at
Rostock and Wittenberg. He then travelled through Germany, the Netherlands,
England, France and Italy, and was received with marked respect at the
different universities he visited. In 1613 he was chosen professor of
medicine in the university of Copenhagen, and filled that office for eleven
years, when, falling into a dangerous illness, he made a vow that if he
should recover he would apply himself solely to the study of divinity. He
fulfilled his vow by becoming professor of divinity at Copenhagen and canon
of Roskilde. He died on the 13th of July 1629 at Sorö in Zeeland.

Of his sons, Thomas (1616-1680) was born at Copenhagen, where, after a long
course of study in various universities of Europe, he was appointed
successively professor of mathematics (1647) and anatomy (1648). During his
tenure of the latter chair he distinguished himself by observations on the
lymphatics. In 1661 he retired to Hagestaed. In 1670 his house and library
were burnt, and in consideration of his loss he was appointed physician to
the king, with a handsome salary, and librarian to the university of
Copenhagen. He died at Hagestaed in 1680. Another son, Erasmus (1625-1698),
born at Roskilde, spent ten years in visiting England, Holland, Germany and
Italy, and filled the chairs of mathematics and medicine at Copenhagen. He
discovered double refraction in Iceland spar (_Experimenta crystalli
islandici disdiaclastici_, Copenhagen, 1669). He died at Copenhagen in
1698. In the third generation Caspar Thomeson (1655-1738), son of Thomas,
also taught anatomy at Copenhagen, his name being associated with the
description of one of the ducts of the sublingual gland and of the
_glandulae Bartholini_, while his younger brother, Thomas (1659-1690), was
a student of northern antiquities who published _Antiquitatum Danicarum
libri tres_ in 1689.