BARTHOLOMEW, SAINT, one of the twelve apostles, regarding whose early life
we know nothing, unless in accordance with a widely-spread belief he is to
be identified with Nathanael (_q.v._). If so, Bartholomew is probably a
patronymic, the apostle's full name being Nathanael Bartolmai, _i.e._ the
son of Tolmai. On the other hand, according to a Syrian tradition,
Bartholomew's original name was Jesus, which he dropped owing to its being
the name of the Master Himself. In the synoptic gospels Bartholomew is
never mentioned except in the lists of the apostles, where his name always
appears after Philip's. He is said to have gone, after the ascension of the
Lord, on a missionary tour to India (then a very wide geographical
designation) where, according to a story in Eusebius (_H.E._ v. 10), he
left behind him a copy of St Matthew's gospel. According to the traditional
account he was flayed alive and then crucified with his head downwards, at
Albanopolis in Armenia, or, according to Nicephorus, at Urbanopolis in
Cilicia. In works of art he is generally represented with a large knife,
the instrument of his martyrdom, or, as in Michelangelo's "Last Judgment,"
with his own skin hanging over his arm. The festival of St Bartholomew is
celebrated on the 24th of August.

[v.03 p.0450] Dr. Nestle has drawn attention to the fact that in the Syriac
translation of Eusebius' history the name Tolmai, _i.e._ Bartholomew, takes
the place of Matthias, the apostle who was appointed in place of Judas (i.
12, cf. ii. 1, iii. 25 and 29). If this identification can be made out
there would, in the list of apostles as finally constituted, be two men who
bore the patronymic Bartholomew. See further _Expository Times_, ix. pp.
566 ff. (1898).