BARTOLUS (1314-1357), Italian jurist, professor of the civil law at the
university of Perugia, and the most famous master of the dialectical school
of jurists, was born in 1314, at Sassoferrato, in the duchy of Urbino, and
hence is generally styled Bartolus de Saxoferrato. His father was
Franciscus Severi, and his mother was of the family of the Alfani. He
studied the civil law first of all under Cinus at Perugia, and afterwards
under Oldradus and Jacobus de Belvisio at Bologna, where he was promoted to
the degree of doctor of civil law in 1334. His great reputation dates from
his appointment to a chair of civil law in the university of Perugia, 1343,
where he lectured for many years, raising the character of the law school
of Perugia to a level with that of Bologna. He died in 1357 at Perugia,
where a magnificent monument recorded the interment of his remains in the
church of San Francisco, by the simple inscription of "Ossa Bartoli."
Bartolus left behind him a great reputation, and many writers have sought
to explain the fact by attributing to him the introduction of the
dialectical method of teaching law; but this method had been employed by
Odofredus, a pupil of Accursius, in the previous century, and the
successors of Odofredus had abused it to an extent which has rendered their
writings in many instances unprofitable to read, the subject matter being
overlaid with dialectical forms. It was the merit of Bartolus, on the other
hand, that he employed the dialectical method with advantage as a teacher,
and discountenanced the abuse of it; but his great reputation was more
probably owing to the circumstance that he revived the exegetical system of
teaching law (which had been [v.03 p.0452] neglected since the ascendancy
of Accursius) in a spirit which gave it new life, whilst he imparted to his
teaching a practical interest, from the judicial experience which he had
acquired while acting as assessor to the courts at Todi and at Pisa before
he undertook the duties of a professorial chair. His treatises _On
Procedure_ and _On Evidence_ are amongst his most valuable works, whilst
his _Commentary on the Code of Justinian_ has been in some countries
regarded as of equal authority with the code itself.