BARTHÉLEMY SAINT-HILAIRE, JULES (1805-1895), French philosopher and
statesman, was born at Paris on the 19th of August 1805. In his early years
he was an active political journalist, and from 1826 to 1830 opposed the
reactionary policy of the king in _Le Globe_. At the revolution of 1830 he
signed the protestation of the journalists on the 28th of July 1830. After
1830 he contributed to different newspapers--_Le Constitutionnel_, _Le
National_ and the _Courrier français_--until 1833, when he gave up politics
in order to devote himself to the history of ancient philosophy,
undertaking a translation of Aristotle, which occupied him the greater part
of his life (1837-1892). The reputation which he gained from this work won
for him the chair of ancient philosophy at the Collège de France (1838) and
a seat at the Academy of Moral and Political Science (1839). After the
revolution of 1848 he was elected as a republican deputy; but was obliged
to withdraw after the _coup d'état_ of Louis Napoleon. In 1855 he went as
member of the international commission to Egypt to report on the
possibility of the proposed Suez canal, and by the articles which he wrote
he contributed largely to making the project popular in France. Elected
deputy again in 1869, he joined the opposition to the Empire, and in 1871
bent all his efforts to the election of Thiers as president of the
republic, acting afterwards as his secretary. Appointed senator for life in
1875, he took his place among the moderate republicans, and from September
1880 to November 1881 was minister of foreign affairs in the cabinet of
Jules Ferry. The most important event of his administration was the
annexation of Tunis under the form of a French protectorate, which he
actively promoted. He died on the 24th of November 1895. His principal
works, besides the translation of Aristotle and a number of studies
connected with the same subject, are _Des Védas_ (1854), _Du Bouddhisme_
(1856) and _Mahomet et le Coran_ (1865).