BOOK OF BARUCH. This deutero-canonical book of the Old Testament is placed
by the LXX. between _Jeremiah_ and _Lamentations_, and in the Vulgate after
_Lamentations_. It consists of several parts, which cohere so badly that we
are obliged to assume plurality of authorship.

_Contents_.--The book consists of the following parts:--

i. 1-14. The historical preface with a description of the origin and
purpose of the book.

i. 15-ii. 5. A confession of sin used by the Palestinian Remnant. This
confession was according to i. 14 sent from Babylon (i. 4, 7) to Jerusalem
to be read "on the day of the feast and on the days of the solemn
assembly." The confession is restricted to the use of the remnant at home
(see next paragraph). In this confession there is a national acknowledgment
of sin and a recognition of the Exile as a righteous judgment.

ii. 6-iii. 8. A confession of the captives in Babylon and a prayer for
restoration. This confession opens as the former (in i. 15) with the words
found also in Daniel ix. 7, "To the Lord our God belongeth righteousness,
&c." The confession is of the Exiles and not of the remnant in Palestine,
as Marshall has pointed out. Thus it is the Exiles clearly who are speaking
in ii. 13, "We are but a few left among the heathen where thou hast
scattered _us_"; ii. 14, "Give us favour in the sight of them which have
led us away captive"; iii. 7, "We will praise thee in our captivity"; iii.
8, "We are yet this day in our captivity where thou hast scattered us." On
the other hand the speakers in the confession in i. 15-ii. 5 are clearly
the remnant in Jerusalem. i. 15, "To the Lord our God belongeth
righteousness, but unto us confusion of face ... to the men of Judah and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem." The Exiles are mentioned by way of contrast
to the speakers; ii. 4, 5, "He hath given _them_ to be in subjection to all
the kingdoms that are round about _us_ to be a reproach among all the
people round about where the Lord hath scattered _them_. Thus were they
cast down ... because _we_ sinned against the Lord our God."[1]

iii. 9-iv. 4. The glorification of wisdom, that is, of the Law. Israel is
bidden to walk in the light of it; it is the glory of Israel and is not to
be given to another.

iv. 5-v. 9. Consolation of Israel with the promise of deliverance and
lasting happiness and blessing to Jerusalem.

_Integrity_.--From the foregoing description it seems clear that the book
is derived from a plurality of authors. Most scholars, such as Fritzsche,
Hitzig, Kneucker, Hilgenfeld, Reuss, agree in assuming that i.-iii. 8 and
iii. 9-v. 9 are from distinct writers. But some critics have gone farther.
Thus Rothstein (Kautzsch, _Apok. und Pseud._ i. 213-215) holds that there
is no unity in iii. 9-v. 9, but that it is composed of two independent
writings--iii. 9-iv. 4 and iv. 5-v. 9. Marshall (Hastings' _Bible
Dictionary_, i. 251-254) gives a still more complex analysis. He finds in
it the work of four distinct writers: i. 1-14, i. 15-iii. 8, iii. 9-iv. 4,
iv. 5-v. 9. The evidence for a fourfold authorship is strong though not
convincing. In any case i.-iii. 8 and iii. 9-v. 9 must be ascribed to
different authors.

_Original Language_.--(1) Some scholars, as Ewald, Kneucker, Davidson,
Rothstein and König, believe that the whole book was originally written in
Hebrew; (2) Fritzsche, Hilgenfeld, Reuss, Gifford, Schürer, and Toy
advocate a Hebrew original of i.-iii. 8 and a Greek original of the rest;
(3) Marshall argues that i.-iii. 8 is translated from a Hebrew original,
iii. 9-iv. 4 from an Aramaic, and the rest from the Greek; (4) and lastly,
Bertholdt, Havernick and Nöldeke regard the Greek as the primitive text.
The last view must be put aside as unworkable. For the third no convincing
evidence has been adduced, nor does it seem likely that any can be. We have
therefore to decide between the two remaining theories. In any case we can
hardly err in admitting a Hebrew original of i.-iii. 8. For (1) we have
such Hebraisms as [Greek: hou ... ep' autôi] = [Hebrew: 'SHR ... `LYW] (ii.
26); [Greek: hou ... ekei] = [Hebrew: 'SHR ... SHM] (ii. 4, 13, 29; iii.
8); [Greek: hôn ... to pneuma autôn] = [Hebrew: 'SHR ... RWCHM] (ii. 7).
(2) We have meaningless expressions which are really mistranslations of the
Hebrew. It is noteworthy that these mistranslations are for the most part
found in Jeremiah--a fact which has rightly drawn scholars to the
conclusion that we owe the LXX of Baruch i.-iii. 8, and of Jeremiah to the
same translator. Thus in i. 9 we have [Greek: desmôtês], "prisoner," where
the text had [Hebrew: MASGEIR] and the Greek should have been rendered
"locksmith." The same mistranslation is found in Jer. xxiv. 1, xxxvi.
(xxix.) 2. Next in ii. 4 we have [Greek: abaton], "wilderness," where the
text had [Hebrew: SHMH] and the translation should have [Greek: ekstasin].
The same misrendering is found several times in Jeremiah. Again [Greek:
ergazesthai] is used in i. 22, ii. 21, 22, 24 as a translation of [Hebrew:
`BD] in the sense of "serving," where [Greek: douleuein] ought to have been
the rendering. So also in Jer. xxxiv. (xxvii.) 11, xxxvii. (xxx.) 8, &c.
Again in [Greek: poleôn Iouda kai exôthen Ierousalêm] the [Greek: exôthen]
is a misrendering of [Hebrew: BCHWTSWT] as in Jer. xi. 6, xl. [v.03 p.0454]
(xxxiii.) 10, &c., where the translator should have given [Greek:
plateiôn].[2] For [Greek: bombêsis] (ii. 29) [Hebrew: HMWN] we should have
[Greek: plêthos]. (3) Finally there are passages where by re-translation we
discover that the translator either misread his text or had a corrupt text
before him. Thus [Greek: manna] in i. 10 is a corrupt translation of
[Hebrew: MNCHH] as elsewhere in a dozen passages of the LXX. In iii. 4
[Greek: tethnêkotôn] = [Hebrew: MEITEIY]--which the translator should have
read as [Hebrew: MTEIY] = [Greek: anthrôpôn].

From the above instances, which could be multiplied, we have no hesitation
in postulating a Hebrew original of i.-iii. 8.

As regards iii. 9-v. 9 the case is different. This section is free from
such notable Hebraisms as we have just dealt with, and no convincing
grounds have been advanced to prove that it is a translation from a Semitic
original.

_Date._--The dates of the various constituents of the book are quite
uncertain. Ewald, followed by Gifford and Marshall, assigns i.-iii. 8 to
the period after the conquest of Jerusalem by Ptolemy I. in 320 B.C.; Reuss
to some decades later; and Fritzsche, Schrade, Keil and Toy to the time of
the Maccabees. Hitzig, Kneucker and Schürer assume that it was written
after A.D. 70. Ryle and James (_Pss. of Solomon_, pp. lxxii.-lxxvii.) hold
that iv. 31-v. 9 is dependent on the Greek version of Ps. xi., and that,
accordingly, Baruch was reduced to its present form after A.D. 70. The most
probable of the above dates appears to be that maintained by Fritzsche,
that is, if we understand by the Maccabean times the early decades of the
2nd cent. B.C. For during the palmy days of the Maccabean dynasty the
Twelve tribes were supposed to be in Palestine. The idea that the Jewish
Kingdom embraced once again the entire nation easily arose when the
Maccabees extended their dominion northwards over Samaria and Galilee and
eastwards beyond the Jordan. This belief displaced the older one that the
nine and a half tribes were still in captivity. With the downfall of the
Maccabean dynasty, however, the older idea revived in the 1st cent. A.D. To
the beginnings of the 2nd cent. A.D. the view of the dead given in ii. 17
would point, where it is said that those whose spirits had been taken from
their bodies would not give glory unto the Lord. The statement as to the
desolate condition of the Temple in ii. 26^a is with Kneucker to be
rejected as an interpolation.

_Canonicity._--The Book of Baruch was never accepted as canonical by the
Palestinian Jews (Baba Batra 14^b), though the _Apostolic Constitutions_,
v. 10, state that it was read in public worship on the 10th day of the
month Gorpiaeus, but this statement can hardly be correct. It was in
general use in the church till its canonicity was rejected by the
Protestant churches and accepted by the Roman church at the council of
Trent.

_Literature. Versions and Editions_.--The versions are the two Latin, a
Syriac, and an Arabic. The Latin one in the Vulgate belongs to a time prior
to Jerome, and is tolerably literal. Another, somewhat later, was first
published by Jos. Maria Caro in 1688, and was reprinted by Sabatier, side
by side with the ante-Hieronymian one, in his _Bibliorum Sacrorum Latinae
Versiones Antiquae_. It is founded upon the preceding one, and is less
literal. The Syriac and Arabic versions, printed in the London Polyglot,
are literal. The Hexaplar-Syriac version made by Paul, bishop of Tella, in
the beginning of the 7th century has been published by Ceriani.

The most convenient editions of the Greek text are Tischendorf's in the
second volume of his Septuagint, and Swete's in vol. iii.; Fritzsche's in
_Libri Apocryphi Veteris Testamenti Graece_ (1871). The best editions of
the book are Kneucker's _Das Buch Baruch_ (1879); Gifford's in the
_Speaker's Apoc._ ii. See also the articles in the _Encyc. Biblica_,
_Hastings' Bible Dictionary_; Schürer, _History of Jewish People_.

APOCALYPSE OF BARUCH. The discovery of this long lost apocalypse was due to
Ceriani. This apocalypse has survived only in the Syriac version of which
Ceriani discovered a 6th century MS. in the Milan library. Of this he
published a Latin translation in 1866 (_Monumenta Sacra_, I. ii. 73-98),
which Fritzsche reproduced in 1871 (_Libri Apocryphi V. T._, pp.654-699),
and the text in 1871 (_Mon. Sacra._ V. ii. 113-180), and subsequently in
photo-lithographic facsimile in 1883. Chaps. lxxviii.-lxxxvi., indeed, of
this book have long been known. These constitute Baruch's epistle to the
nine and a half tribes in captivity, and have been published in Syriac and
Latin in the London and Paris Polyglots, and in Syriac alone from one MS.
in Lagarde's _Libri V. T. Apocryphi Syr._ (1861); and by Charles from ten
MSS. (_Apocalypse of Baruch_, 1896, pp. 124-167). The entire book was
translated into English by the last-named writer (_op. cit._ pp. 1-167),
and into German by Ryssel (Kautzsch's _Apok. und Pseud._, 1900, ii. pp.
413-446).

The Syriac is translated from the Greek; for Greek words are occasionally
transliterated, and passages can be explained only on the hypothesis that
the wrong alternative meanings of certain Greek words were followed by the
translator. The Greek in turn is derived from the Hebrew, for
unintelligible expressions in the Syriac can be explained and the text
restored by retranslation into Hebrew. Thus in xxi. 9, 11, 12, xxiv. 2,
lxii. 7 we have an unintelligible antithesis, "those who sin and those who
are justified." The source of the error can be discovered by retranslation.
The Syriac in these passages is a stock rendering of [Greek: dikaiousthai],
and this in turn of [Hebrew: TSDQ]. But [Hebrew: TSDQ] means not only
[Greek: dikaiousthai] but also [Greek: dikaios einai], and this is the very
meaning required by the context in the above passages: "those who sin and
those who are righteous."[3] Again xliv. 12 the text reads: "the new world
which does not turn to corruption those who depart _on its beginning_ and
has no mercy on those who depart to torment." Here "on its beginning" is
set over antithetically against "to torment," whereas the context requires
"to its blessedness." The words "on its beginning"--[Hebrew: KR'SHW], a
corruption of [Hebrew: B'SHRW]--"to its blessedness." Again in lvi. 6 it is
said that the fall of man brought grief, anguish, pain, trouble and
_boasting_ into the world. The term "boasting" in this connexion cannot be
right. The word = [Greek: kauchêma] = [Hebrew: THLH](?), corrupt for
[Hebrew: MCHLH], "disease." A further ground for inferring a Hebrew
original is to be found in the fact that paronomasiae not infrequently
discover themselves in the course of retranslation into Hebrew. One
instance will suffice. In xlviii. 35, "Honour will be turned into shame,
strength humiliated into contempt ... and beauty will become a scorn"
contains three such:

    [Hebrew: KBWD YHPK LQLWN `Z YWRD 'L BWZ WWPY YHYH LDWPY]

(see Charles, _Apoc. Bar._ pp. xliv.-liii). The necessity of postulating a
Hebrew original was first shown by the present writer, and has since been
maintained by Wellhausen (_Skizzen u. Vorarbeiten_, vi. 234), by Ryssel
(_Apok. und Pseudepig. A. T._, 1900, ii. 411), and Ginzberg (_Jewish
Encyclopaedia_, ii. 555).

_Different Elements in the Book and their Dates_.--As there are undoubtedly
conflicting elements in the book, it is possible to assume either a
diversity of authorship or a diversity of sources. The latter view is
advocated by Ryssel and Ginzberg, the former by Kabisch, de Faye, R. H.
Charles and Beer (Herzog's _Realenc._, art. "_Pseudepigraphen des Alten
Testaments_," p. 250). A short summary may here be given of the grounds on
which the present writer has postulated a diversity of authorship. If the
letter to the tribes in captivity (lxxviii.-lxxxvi.) be disregarded, the
book falls into seven sections separated by fasts, save in one case (after
xxxv.) where the text is probably defective. These sections, which are of
unequal length, are--(1) i.-v. 6; (2) v. 7-viii.; (3) ix.-xii. 4; (4) xii.
5-xx.; (5) xxi.-xxxv.; (6) xxxvi.-xlvi.; (7) xlvii.-lxxvii. These treat of
the Messiah and the Messianic kingdom, the woes of Israel in the past and
the destruction of Jerusalem in the present, as well as of theological
questions relating to original sin, free will, works, the number of the
saved, the nature of the resurrection body, &c. The views expressed on
several of the above subjects are often conflicting. In one class of
passages there is everywhere manifest a vigorous optimism as to Israel's
ultimate well-being on earth, and the blessedness of the chosen people in
the Messianic kingdom is sketched in glowing and sensuous colours (xxix.,
xxxix.-xl., lxiii.-lxxiv.). Over against these passages stand others of a
hopelessly pessimistic character, wherein, alike as to Israel's [v.03
p.0455] present and future destiny on earth, there is written nothing save
"lamentation, and mourning, and woe." The world is a scene of corruption,
its evils are irremediable, its end is nigh, and the advent of the new and
spiritual world at hand. The first to draw attention to the composite
elements in this book was Kabisch (_Jahrbücher f. protest. Theol._, 1891,
pp. 66-107). This critic regarded xxiv. 3-xxix., xxxvi.-xl. and
liii.-lxxiv. as independent sources written before the fall of Jerusalem,
A.D. 70, and his groundwork, which consists of the rest of his book, with
the exception of a few verses, as composed after that date. All these
elements were put together by a Christian contemporary of Papias. Many of
these conclusions were arrived at independently by a French scholar, De
Faye (_Les Apocalypses juives_, 1892, pp. 25-28, 76-103, 192-204). The
present writer (_Apocalypse of Baruch_, 1896, pp. liii.-lxvii.), after
submitting the book to a fresh study, has come to the following
conclusions:--The book is of Pharisaic authorship and composed of six
independent writings--A^1, A^2, A^3, B^1, B^2, B^3. The first three were
composed when Jerusalem was still standing and the Messiah and the
Messianic kingdom were expected: A^1, a mutilated apocalypse = xxvii.-xxx.
1; A^2, the Cedar and Vine Vision = xxxvi.-xl.; A^3, the Cloud Vision =
liii.-lxxiv. The last three were written after A.D. 70, and probably before
90. Thus B^3 = lxxxv. was written by a Jew in exile, who, despairing of a
national restoration, looked only for a spiritual recompense in heaven. The
rest of the book is derived from B^1 and B^2, written in Palestine after
A.D. 70. These writings belong to very different types of thought. In B^1
the earthly Jerusalem is to be rebuilt, but not so in B^2; in the former
the exiles are to be restored, but not in the latter; in the former a
Messianic kingdom without a Messiah is expected, but no earthly blessedness
of any kind in the latter, &c. B^1 = i.-ix. 1, xxxii. 2-4, xliii.-xliv. 7,
xlv.-xlvi., lxxvii.-lxxxii., lxxxiv., lxxxvi.-lxxxvii. B^2 = ix.-xxv., xxx.
2-xxxv., xli.-xlii., xliv. 8-15, xlvii.-lii., lxxv.-lxxvi., lxxxiii. The
final editor of the work wrote in the name of Baruch the son of Neriah.

The above critical analyses were attacked and rejected by Clemen (_Stud.
und Krit._, 1898, 211 sqq.). He fails, however, in many cases to recognize
the difficulties at issue, and those which cannot be ignored he sets down
to the conflicting apocalyptic traditions, on which the author was obliged
to draw for his subject-matter. Though Ryssel (Kautzsch, _Apok. u. Pseud.
des A. T._ ii. 409) has followed Clemen, neither has given any real
explanation of the disorder of the book as it stands at present. Beer (_op.
cit._) agrees that xxxvi.-xl. and liii.-lxx. are of different authorship
from the rest of the book and belong to the earlier date.

_Relation to 4 Ezra._--The affinities of this book and 4 Ezra are so
numerous (see Charles, _op. cit._ 170-171) that Ewald and Ryle assumed
identity of authorship. But their points of divergence are so weighty (see
_op. cit._ pp. lxix.-lxxi.) that this view cannot be sustained. Three
courses still remain open. If we assume that both works are composite, we
shall perforce admit that some of the constituents of 4 Ezra are older than
the latest of Baruch, and that other constituents of Baruch are decidedly
older than the remaining ones of 4 Ezra. On the other hand, if we assume
unity of authorship, it seems impossible to arrive at finality on the
chronological relations of these two works. Langen, Hilgenfeld, Wieseler,
Stähelin, Renan, Hausrath, Drummond, Dillmann, Rosenthal, Gunkel, have
maintained on various grounds the priority of 4 Ezra; and Schürer, Bissell,
Thomson, Deane, Kabisch, De Faye, Wellhausen, and Ryssel the priority of
Baruch on grounds no less convincing.

_Relation to Rabbinical Literature._--A very close relation subsists
between our book and rabbinical literature. Indeed in some instances the
parallels are so close that they are almost word for word. The description
of the destruction of Jerusalem by angels in vi.-viii. is found also in the
Pesikta Rabbati 26 (ed. Friedmann 131a). By means of this passage we are,
as Ginzberg has shown, able to correct the corrupt reading "the holy Ephod"
(vi. 7), [Hebrew: 'PWD HQWDSH] into "the holy Ark," _i.e._ [Hebrew: 'RWN
HQWDSH]. What might be taken as poetic fancies in our text are recounted as
historical facts in rabbinical literature. Thus the words (x. 18):

 "And ye priests, take ye the keys of the sanctuary,
  And cast them into the height of heaven,
  And give them to the Lord and say:
 'Guard Thine own house; for lo we are found unfaithful stewards,'"

are given in various accounts of the fall of Jerusalem. (See Ta'anith, 29a;
Pesi[k.]t. R., _loc. cit._; _Yalqu[t.] Shim`oni_ on Is. xxi; _Aboth_ of
Rabbi Nathan vii.). Even the statement that the bodies of Sennacherib's
soldiers were burned while their garments and armour remained unconsumed
has its parallel in _Sanh_. 94a.

_Integrity of the Book._--In lxxvii. 19 it is said that Baruch wrote two
epistles, one to the nine and a half tribes and the other to the two and a
half at Babylon. The former is found in lxxviii.-lxxxvi.; the latter is
lost, but is probably preserved either wholly or in part in the Book of
Baruch, iii. 9-iv. 29 (see Charles, _op. cit._ pp. lxv.-lxvii). On the
other hand, it is not necessary to infer from lxxv. that an account of
Baruch's assumption was to be looked for in the book.

AUTHORITIES.--The literature is fully cited in Schürer, _Gesch._ iii.
223-232, and R. H. Charles, _Apocalypse of Baruch_, pp. xxx.-xliii.
Ginzberg's article in the _Jewish Encyclopaedia_, ii. 551-556, is a fresh
and valuable contribution.

REST OF THE WORDS OF BARUCH. This book was undoubtedly written originally
by a Jew but was subsequently revised by a Christian, as has been shown by
Kohler in the _Jewish Quarterly Review_ (1893), pp. 407-409. It passed
under a double name in the Abyssinian Church, where it was known both as
"the Rest of the Words of Baruch" and "the Rest of the Words of Jeremiah."
Its Greek name is the latter--[Greek: ta paraleipomena Hieremiou
prophêtou]. It has been preserved in Greek, Ethiopic, Armenian and
Slavonic. The Greek was first printed at Venice in 1609, next by Ceriani in
1868 in his _Mon. Sacra_, v. 11-18; by Harris, _The Rest of the Words of
Baruch_, in 1889; and Bassiliev, _Anec. Graeco-Byzantina_, i. 308 sqq.
(1893). The book begins like the Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch with an
account of the removal of the sacred vessels of the Temple before its
capture by the Chaldees. Baruch remains in Jerusalem and Jeremiah
accompanies the Exiles to Babylon. After 66 years' exile Jeremiah brings
back the Jews to Jerusalem, but refuses to admit such as had brought with
them heathen wives. Then follows a vision of Jeremiah which is Christian.

Harris regards the book in its present form as an eirenicon addressed to
the Jews by a Christian after the rebellion of Bar Cochba (Barcochebas) and
written about 136. Though the original work was dependent on the Apocalypse
of Baruch it cannot have been written much before the close of the 1st
cent. A.D. Its _terminus ad quem_ is at present indeterminable.

(R. H. C.)

[1] Toy (_Jewish Enc_. ii. 556) thinks that the "them" in ii. 4, 5 may be a
scribal slip and that we have here not the confession of the Palestinian
remnant and that of the Exiles, but simply a juxtaposition of two forms of
confession.

[2] In ii. 25 we have the word [Greek: apostolê] with the extraordinary
meaning of "plague" as in Jer. xxxix. (xxxii.) 36.

[3] Ryssel has adopted Charles's restoration of the text in these passages
and practically also in xliv. 12. but without acknowledgment.