BARYE, ANTOINE LOUIS (1796-1875), French sculptor, was born in Paris on the
24th of September 1796. Like many of the sculptors of the Renaissance he
began life as a goldsmith. After studying under Bosio, the sculptor, and
Gros, the painter, he was in 1818 admitted to the École des Beaux Arts. But
it was not till 1823, when he was working for Fauconnier, the goldsmith,
that he discovered his real bent from watching the wild beasts in the
Jardin des Plantes, making vigorous studies of them in pencil drawings
worthy of Delacroix and then modelling them in sculpture on a large or
small scale. In 1831 he exhibited his "Tiger devouring a Crocodile," and in
1832 had mastered a style of his own in the "Lion and Snake." Thenceforward
Barye, though engaged in a perpetual struggle with want, exhibited year
after year these studies of animals--admirable groups which reveal him as
inspired by a spirit of true romance and a feeling for the beauty of the
antique, as in "Theseus and the Minotaur" (1847), "Lapitha and Centaur"
(1848), and numerous minor works now very highly valued. Barye was no less
successful in sculpture on a small scale, and excelled in representing
animals in their most familiar attitudes. As examples of his larger work we
may mention the Lion of the Column of July, of which the plaster model was
cast in 1839, various lions and tigers in the gardens of the Tuileries, and
the four groups--War, Peace, Strength, and Order (1854). In 1852 he cast
his bronze "Jaguar devouring a Hare." The fame he deserved came too late to
the sculptor. He was made professor at the museum in 1854, and was elected
to the Academy of Fine Arts in 1868. He died on the 25th of June 1875. The
mass of admirable work left to us by Barye entitles him to be regarded as
the greatest artist of animal life of the French school, and as the creator
of a new class of art which has attracted such men as Frémiet, Peter, Cain,
and Gardet, who are regarded with justice as his worthiest followers.

AUTHORITIES.--Emile Lamé, _Les Sculpteurs d'animaux; M. Barye_ (Paris,
1856); Gustave Planche, "M. Barye," _Revue des deux mondes_ (July 1851);
Théophile Silvestre, _Histoires des artistes vivants_ (Paris, 1856); Arsène
Alexandre, "A. L. Barye," _Les Artistes célèbres_, ed. E. Muntz (Paris,
1889) (with a bibliog.); Charles DeKay, _Life and Works of A. L. Barye_
(1889), published by the Barye Monument Assoc. of New York; Jules Claretie,
_Peintres et sculpteurs contemporains_ (1882); Roger Ballu, _L'Oeuvre de
Barye_ (1890); Charles Sprague Smith, _Barbizon Days_ (1903).

(H. FR.)