BARYATINSKY, ALEXANDER IVANOVICH, PRINCE (1814-1879), Russian soldier and
governor of the Caucasus, was privately educated, entered the school of the
ensigns of the Guard in his seventeenth year and, on the 8th of November
1833, received his commission of cornet in the Life Guards of the
cesarevich Alexander. In 1835 he served with great gallantry in the
Caucasus, and on his return to St Petersburg was rewarded with a gold sword
"for valour." On the first of January 1836 he was attached to the suite of
Alexander, and in 1845 was again ordered off to the Caucasus and again most
brilliantly distinguished himself, especially in the attack on Shamyl's
stronghold, for which he received the order of St George. In 1846 he
assisted [v.03 p.0456] Fieldmarshal Paskievich to suppress the Cracow
rising. From 1848 to 1856 he took a leading part in all the chief military
events in the Caucasus, his most notable exploits being his victory at
Mezeninsk in 1850 and his operations against Shamyl at Chechen. His
energetic and at the same time systematic tactics inaugurated a new era of
mountain warfare. On the 6th of January 1853 he was appointed
adjutant-general and, on July 5th of the same year, chief of the staff. In
1854 he took part in the brilliant Kürük Dere campaign. On the 1st of
January 1856 he became commander-in-chief of the Caucasian army, and,
subsequently, governor of the Caucasus. As an administrator he showed
himself fully worthy of his high reputation. Within three years of his
appointment, the whole of the eastern Caucasus was subdued and the long
elusive Shamyl was taken captive. Baryatinsky also conquered many of the
tribes of the western Caucasus dwelling between the rivers Laba and
Byelaya. For these fresh services he was created a fieldmarshal. But his
health was now entirely broken by his strenuous labours, and on the 6th of
December 1862 he was, at his own request, relieved of his post. He spent
the last days of his life abroad and died at Geneva, after forty-eight
years of active service.

See A. L. Zisserman, _Fieldmarshal Prince A. I. Baryatinski_ (Russ.)
(Moscow, 1888-1891).