BASEL (Fr. _Bâle_), one of the most northerly of the Swiss cantons, and the
only one (save Schaffhausen) that includes any territory north of the
Rhine. It is traversed by the chain of the Jura, and is watered by the Birs
and the Ergolz, both tributaries (left) of the Rhine. It is traversed by
railways from Basel to Olten (25 m.) and to Laufen (14¼ m.), besides local
lines from Basel to Flühen (8 m.) for the frequented pilgrimage resort of
Mariastein, and from Liestal to Waldenburg (8¾ m.), From 1803 to 1814 the
canton was one of the six "Directorial" cantons of the Confederation. Since
1833 it has been divided into two half cantons, with independent
constitutions.

One is that of Basel Stadt or Bâle Ville, including, besides the city of
Basel, the three rural districts (all to the north of the Rhine) of Riehen,
Bettingen and Klein Hüningen (the latter now united to the city). The total
area of this half canton is 13.7 sq. m. only, of which 11 sq. m. are
classed as "productive," forests occupying 1.5 sq. m., but its total
population in 1900 was 112,227 (of whom 3066 inhabited the rural
districts), mainly German-speaking, and numbering 73,063 Protestants,
37,101 Romanists (including the Old Catholics), and 1897 Jews. The cantonal
constitution dates from 1889. The executive of seven members and the
legislature (_Grossrat_) of 130 members, as well as the one member sent to
the Federal _Ständerat_ and the six sent to the Federal _Nationalrat_, are
all elected by a direct popular vote for the term of three years. Since
1875, 1000 citizens can claim a popular vote (_facultative Referendum_) on
all bills, or can exercise the right of _initiative_ whether as to laws or
the revision of the cantonal constitution.

The other half canton is that of Basel Landschaft or Bâle Campagne, which
is divided into four administrative districts and comprises seventy-four
communes, its capital being Liestal. Its total area is 165 sq. m., of which
all but 5 sq. m. is reckoned "productive" (including 55.9 sq. m. of
forests). In 1900 its total population was 68,497, nearly all
German-speaking, while there were 52,763 Protestants, 15,564 Romanists, and
130 Jews.

The cantonal constitution dates from 1892. The executive of 5 members and
the legislature or _Landrat_ (one member per 800 inhabitants or fraction
over 400), as well as the single member sent to the Federal _Ständerat_ and
the three sent to the Federal _Nationalrat_, are all elected by a direct
popular vote for three years. The "obligatory Referendum" obtains in the
case of all laws, while 1500 citizens have the right of "initiative"
whether as to laws or the revision of the cantonal constitution. Silk
ribbon weaving, textile industries and the manufacture of tiles are carried
on.

(W. A. B. C.)