BASEL (Fr. _Bâle_, but _Basle_ is a wholly erroneous form; Ital.
_Basilea_), the capital of the Swiss half canton of Basel Stadt or Bâle
Ville. It is now the second most populous (109,161 inhabitants) town
(ranking after Zürich) in the Swiss Confederation, while it is reputed to
be the richest, the number of resident millionaires (in francs) exceeding
that of any other Swiss town. Both facts are largely due to the opening
(1882) of the St Gotthard railway, as merchandise collected from every part
of north and central Europe is stored in Basel previous to being
redistributed by means of that line. Hence the city has an extremely large
and flourishing transit trade, despite the rather dingy appearance of its
older portions. The city is divided by the Rhine into Gross Basel (south)
and Klein Basel (north), the former being by far the larger. There are
several bridges over the river, the old wooden bridge having been replaced
in 1905 by one built of stone. The central or main railway station is in
Gross Basel, while the Baden station is in Klein Basel. The most prominent
building in the city is the cathedral or Münster, built of deep red
sandstone, on a terrace high above the Rhine. It was consecrated in 1019,
but was mainly rebuilt after the disastrous earthquake of 1356 that nearly
ruined the city. The public meetings of the great oecumenical council
(1431-1449) were held in the choir, while the committees sat in the
chapter-house. Erasmus lived in Basel 1521-1529, and on his death there
(1536) was buried in the cathedral, attached to which are cloisters, in
which various celebrated men are buried, _e.g._ Oecolampadius (d. 1531),
Grynaeus (d. 1541), Buxtorf (d. 1732). The 16th-century Rathaus or town
hall has recently been restored. In the museum is a fine collection of
works of art by Holbein (who lived in Basel from [v.03 p.0463] 1528 to
1531), while the historical museum (in the old Franciscan church) contains
many treasures, and among them the fragments of the famous _Dance of
Death_, wrongly attributed to Holbein. The university (founded by Pius II.
in 1460) is the oldest in Switzerland, and of late years has been extended
by the construction of detached buildings for the study of the natural
sciences, _e.g._ the Vesalianum and the Bernoullianum. The university
library is very rich, and contains the original MSS. of the acts of the
great oecumenical council. There are a number of modern monuments in the
city, the most important being that set up to the memory of the Swiss who
fell in the battle of St Jakob (1444), won by the French. Basel is the seat
of the chief missionary society in Switzerland, the training school for
missionaries being at St Chrischona, 6 m. out of the city.

The town was founded in A.D. 374 by the emperor Valentinian, from whose
residence there it takes its name. In the 5th century the bishop of Augusta
Rauricorum (now called Kaiser Augst), 7½ m. to the east, moved his see
thither. Henceforth the history of the city is that of the growing power,
spiritual and temporal, of the bishops, whose secular influence was
gradually supplanted in the 14th century by the advance of the rival power
of the burghers. In 1356 the city was nearly destroyed by a great
earthquake. After long swaying between the neighbouring Rhine cities and
the Swiss Confederation, it was admitted into the latter in 1501. It later
became one of the chief centres of the Reformation movement in Switzerland,
so that the bishop retired in 1525 to Porrentruy, where he resided till
1792, finally settling at Soleure in 1828, the bishopric having been wholly
reorganized since 1814. As in other Swiss towns the trade gilds got all
political power into their hands, especially by the 18th century. They
naturally favoured the city at the expense of the rural districts, so that
in 1832 the latter proclaimed their independence, and in 1833 were
organized into the half canton of Basel Landschaft, the city forming that
of Basel Stadt.

See _Basler Biographien_ (3 vols., 1900-1905); _Basler Chroniken_ (original
chronicles), (5 vols., Leipzig, 1872-1890); H. Boos, _Geschichte von
Basel_, vol. i. (to 1501) alone published (1877); A. Burckhardt, _Bilder
aus d. Geschichte von Basel_ (3 vols., 1869-1882); _Festschrift z. 400ten
Jahrestage d. ewig. Bundes zwisch. B. und den Eidgenossen_ (1901); T.
Geering, _Handel und Industrie d. Stadt Basel_ (1885); A. Heusler,
_Verfassungsgeschichte d. Stadt Basel im Mittelalter_ (1860), and
_Rechtsquellen von Basel_ (2 vols., 1856-1865); L. A. Stocker, _Basler
Stadtbilder_ (1890); L. Stouff, _Pouvoir temporel des évêques de Bâle_ (2
vols., Paris, 1891); R. Thommen, _Gesch. d. Universität B._, 1532-1632
(1889); _Urkundenbuch d. Landschaft B._ (pub. from 1881), and ditto for the
city (pub. from 1890); W. Vischer, _Gesch. d. Universität B._, 1460-1529
(1860); R. Wackernagel, _Gesch. d. Stadt Basel_ (3 vols., 1906 sqq.); K.
Weber, _Die Revolution im Kanton Basel_, 1830-1833 (1907); G. Gautherot,
_La République rauracienne_ (1908).

(W. A. B. C.)