BASHAN, a region lying E. of the Jordan, and towards its source. Its
boundaries are not very well defined, but it may be said in general to have
been north of the territory of Gilead. The name first appears in Hebrew
history in connexion with the wanderings of the Israelites. According to
Numbers xxi. 33, the tribes after the rout of Sihon, king of the Amorites,
turned to go by the land of Bashan; and its king, Og, met them at Edrei,
and was there defeated and slain. The value of this narrative is a matter
of much dispute. The gigantic stature of the king, and the curious details
about his "bedstead" (Deut. iii. 11) are regarded as suggestive of legend;
to say nothing of the lateness of all the documents relating to the wars of
Og, and the remoteness of Bashan from the regions of the Israelites'
wandering. The story, however, had so firm a hold on Hebrew tradition that
it can hardly fail to have some basis in fact; and an invasion by Israel of
Bashan before coming to Jordan is by no means an improbability.

The great stature of Og is explained in the passage of Deuteronomy
mentioned by the statement that he was of the remnant of the aboriginal
_Rephaim_. This was a race distinguished by lofty stature; and in Genesis
xiv. 5 we find them established in Ashteroth-Karnaim (probably the same as
_Ashtaroth_, which, as we shall see, was an important city of Bashan). The
territory [v.03 p.0465] was allotted on the partition of the conquered land
to the eastern division of the tribe of Manasseh (Numbers xxxiii. 33; Josh.
xiii. 29). One of the cities of refuge, Golan, was in Bashan (Deut. iv.
43). By Solomon, Bashan, or rather "the region of Argob in Bashan,"
containing "threescore great cities with walls and brazen bars," was
assigned to the administrative district of Ben-Geber, one of his
lieutenants (1 Kings iv. 13, compare ver. 19). In the days of Jehu the
country was taken from Israel by Hazael, king of Syria (2 Kings x. 33).
This is the last historical event related in the Old Testament of Bashan.
In the poetical and prophetic books it is referred to in connexion with the
products for which it was noted. From a passage in the "Blessing of Moses"
(Deut. xxxiii. 22) it seems to have been inhabited by lions. Elsewhere it
is referred to in connexion with its cattle (Deut. xxxii. 14; Ezek. xxxix.
18), which seem to have been proverbial for ferocity (Ps. xxii. 12); Amos
(iv. 1) calls the wealthy women of Samaria, who oppressed the poor, "kine
of Bashan." It is also noted for its mountain (Ps. lxviii. 15), and
especially for oaks, which are coupled with the cedars of Lebanon (Isa. ii.
13; compare xxxiii. 9; Zechariah xi. 2). Oars were made from them (Ezek.
xxvii. 6).

The boundaries of Bashan may to some extent be deduced from the indications
afforded in the earlier historical books. Og dwelt at Ashteroth, and did
battle with the Israelites at Edrei (Deut. i. 4). In Deut. iii. 4, "the
region of Argob" with its threescore cities is mentioned; Mt. Hermon is
referred to as a northern limit, and Salecah is alluded to in addition to
the other cities already mentioned. Josh. xii. 4 and Josh. xiii. 29 confirm
this. Josephus (_Ant._ iv. 5. 3; _Wars_, ii. 6. 3) enumerates four
provinces of Bashan, Gaulanitis, Trachonitis, Auranitis and Batanaea.
Gaulanitis (which probably derived its name from the city of refuge, Golan,
the site of which has not yet been discovered) is represented by the modern
Jaul[=a]n, a province extending from the Jordan lakes to the Haj Road.
Josephus (_Wars_, iv. 1. 1) speaks of it as divided into two sections,
Gamalitis and Sogana. Trachonitis (mentioned in Luke iii. 1 as in the
territory of Philip the tetrarch) adjoined the territory of Damascus,
Auranitis and Batanaea. This corresponds to the _Trach[=o]nes_ of Strabo
(xvi. 20), and the modern district of the Lej[=a]; inscriptions have been
found in the Lej[=a] giving Trach[=o]n as its former name. Auranitis is the
Hauran of Ezekiel xlvii. 16, and of the modern Arabs. It is south of the
Jaul[=a]n and north of Gilead. According to Porter (_Journal Soc. Lit._,
1854, p. 303), the name is locally restricted to the plain south of the
Lej[=a]. and the narrow strip on the west; although it is loosely applied
by strangers to the whole country east of the Jaul[=a]n. The fourth
province, Batanaea, which still is remembered in the name _`Ard
el-Bathaniyeh_, lies east of the Lej[=a] and the Hauran plain, and includes
the Jebel ed-Dr[=u]z or Hauran mountain.

The identification of Argob, a region of the kingdom of Og, is a matter of
much difficulty. It has been equated on philological grounds to the
Lej[=a]. But these arguments have been shown to be shaky if not baseless,
and the identification is now generally abandoned. The confidence with
which the great cities of Og were identified with the extensive remains of
ancient sites in the Lej[=a] and Hauran has also been shown to be without
justification. All the so-called "giant cities of Bashan" without exception
are now known to be Greco-Roman, not earlier than the time of Herod, and,
though in themselves of very high architectural and historical interest,
have no connexion whatever with the more ancient periods. No tangible
traces of Og and his people, or even of their Israelite supplanters, have
yet been found.

This fact somewhat weakens the various identifications that have been
proposed for the cities of Bashan enumerated by name. Edrei for example is
identified with _Ed-Dera`a_. This is perhaps the most satisfactory
comparison, for besides the Greco-Roman remains there is an extensive
subterranean city of unknown date, which may be of great antiquity, though
even this is still _sub judice_. The other identifications that have
commanded most acceptance are as follows:--Ashteroth Karnaim, also called
Ashtaroth and (Josh. xxi. 27) Be-eshterah, has been identified with
_Busrah_ (Bostra), where are very important Herodian ruins, but there is no
tangible evidence yet adduced that the history of this site is of so remote
antiquity. From the similarity of the names, it has also been sought at
_Tell Ashari_ and _Tell `Ashtera_. The true site can be determined, if at
all; by excavation only; identifications based on mere outward similarity
of names have always been fruitful sources of error. Salecah is perhaps
less doubtful; it is a remarkable name, and a ruin similarly styled,
_Salkhat_, is to be seen in the Hauran. It is inhabited by Druses. Another
town in eastern Manasseh, namely Kenath, has been identified by Porter with
Kanawat, which may be correct.

In the later history Bashan became remarkable as a refuge for outlaws and
robbers, a character it still retains. The great subterranean "city" at
Ed-Dera`a has been partially destroyed by the local sub-governor, in order
to prevent it becoming a refuge of fugitives from justice or from
government requirements (conscription, taxation, &c.). Strabo refers to a
great cave in Trachonitis capable of holding 4000 robbers. Arab tradition
regards it as the home of Job; and it is famous as being the centre of the
Ghassanid dynasty. The Hauran is one of the principal habitations of the
sect of the Druses (_q.v._).

The physical characteristics of Bashan are noteworthy. Volcanic in
origin--the Jebel ed-Druz is a group of extinct volcanoes--the friable
volcanic soil is extraordinarily fertile. It is said to yield wheat
eighty-fold and barley a hundred. The oaks for which the country was once
famous still distinguish it in places.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--In addition to books mentioned under PALESTINE see the
following:--U. J. Seetzen, _Reisen durch Syrien, Palastina, Phonicien, &c._
(4 vols., 1854); Rev. J. L. Porter, _Five Years in Damascus_ (2 vols.,
1855); _The Giant Cities of Bashan_ (out of date, but some of the
descriptions good, 1865); J. G. Wetzstein, _Reisebericht über Hauran und
die Trachonen_ (Berlin, 1860); Sir R. F. Burton and C. F. T. Drake,
_Unexplored Syria_ (1872); G. Schumacher, _The Jaul[=a]n_ (1888); _Abila,
Fella and Northern Ajlun_ (1890); _Across the Jordan_ (1886), (Palestine
Exploration Fund); Rev. W. Ewing, _A Journey in the Hauran_ (with a large
collection of inscriptions); Palestine Exploration Fund _Quarterly
Statement_, 1895; W. H. Waddington's _Inscriptions of Syria_ may also be
consulted; Dussaud (René) and Frédéric Macler, _Voyage archéologique au
Safâ et dans le Djabel ed-Dr[=u]z_ (1901). In 1900 an important survey of
the Hauran and neighbouring regions was made under American auspices,
directed by Dr Enno Littmann; the publication of the great harvest of
results was begun in 1906.

(R. A. S. M.)