BASILIDES, one of the most conspicuous exponents of Gnosticism, was living
at Alexandria probably as early as the first decades of the 2nd century. It
is true that Eusebius, in his _Chronicle_, dates his first appearance from
A.D. 133, but according to Eusebius, _Hist. Eccl._ iv. 7 §§ 6-8, Agrippa
Castor, who lived under Hadrian (117-138), already wrote a polemic against
him, so that his activity may perhaps be set back to a date earlier than
138. Basilides wrote an exegetical work in twenty-four books on "his"
gospel, but which this was is not known. In addition to this there are
certain writings by his son Isidorus [Greek: Peri prosphuous psuchês];
[Greek: Exêgêtika] on the prophet Parchor ([Greek: Parchôr]); [Greek:
Êthika]. The surviving fragments of these works are collected and commented
on in Hilgenfeld's _Ketzergeschichte_, 207-218. The most important fragment
published by Hilgenfeld (p. 207), part of the 13th book of the _Exegetica_,
in the _Acta Archelai et Manetis_ c. 55, only became known in its complete
form later, and was published by L. Traube in the _Sitzungsbericht der
Münchener Akad._, phil. histor. Kl. (1903), pp. 533-549. Irenaeus (_Adv.
Haer._ i. 24 §§ 3-7) gives a sketch of Basilides' school of thought,
perhaps derived from Justin's _Syntagma_. Closely related to this is the
account in the _Syntagma_ of Hippolytus, which is preserved in Epiphanius,
_Haer._ 24, Philaster, _Haer._ 32, and Pseudo-Tertullian, _Haer._ 4. These
are completed and confirmed by a number of scattered notices in the
_Stromateis_ of Clemens Alexandrinus. An essentially different account,
with a pronounced monistic tendency, is presented by the so-called
_Philosophumena_ of Hippolytus (vii. 20-27; x. 14). Whether this last
account, or that given by Irenaeus and in the _Syntagma_ of Hippolytus,
represents the original system of Basilides, has been the subject of a long
controversy. (See Hilgenfeld p. 205, note 337.) The most recent opinion
tends to decide against the _Philosophumena_; for, in its composition,
Hippolytus appears to have used as his principal source the compendium of a
Gnostic author who has introduced into most of the systems treated by him,
in addition to the employment of older sources, his own opinions or those
of his sect. The _Philosophumena_, therefore, cannot be taken into account
in describing the teaching of Basilides (see also H. Stachelin, "Die
gnostischen Quellen Hippolyts" in _Texte und Untersuchungen_, vi. 3; and
the article GNOSTICISM). A comparison of the surviving fragments of
Basilides, moreover, with the outline of his system in Irenaeus-Hippolytus
(_Syntagma_) shows that the account given by the Fathers of the Church is
also in the highest degree untrustworthy. The principal and most
characteristic points are not noticed by them. If we assume, as we must
needs do, that the opinions which Basilides promulgates as the teaching of
the "barbari" (_Acta Archelai_ c. 55) were in fact his own, the fragments
prove him to have been a decided dualist, and his teaching an interesting
further development of oriental (Iranian) dualism. Entirely consistent with
this is the information given by the _Acta Archelai_ that Basilides, before
he came to Alexandria, had appeared publicly among the Persians (_fuit
praedicator apud Persas_); and the allusion to his having appealed to
prophets with oriental names, Barkabbas and Barkoph (Agrippa in Eusebius
_Hist. Eccl._ iv. 7 § 7). So too his son Isidorus explained the prophecies
of a certain Parchor ( = Barkoph) and appealed to the prophecies of Cham[1]
(Clemens Alexandrinus, _Stromat._ vi. 6 § 53). Thus Basilides assumed the
existence of two principles, not derivable from each other: Light and
Darkness. These had existed for a long time side by side, without knowing
anything of each other, but when they perceived each other, the Light had
only looked and then turned away; but the Darkness, seized with desire for
the Light, had made itself master, not indeed of the Light itself, but only
of its reflection (_species_, _color_). Thus they had been in a position to
form this world: _unde nec perfectum bonum est in hoc mundo, et quod est,
valde est exiguum_. This speculation is clearly a development of that which
the Iranian cosmology has to tell about the battles between Ahura-Mazda and
Angro-Mainyu (Ormuzd and Ahriman). The Iranian optimism has been replaced
here by a strong pessimism. This material world is no longer, as in
Zoroastrianism, essentially a creation of the good God, but the powers of
evil have created it with the aid of some stolen portions of light. This is
practically the transference of Iranian dualism to the more Greek
antithesis of soul and body, spirit and matter (cf. Irenaeus i. 24 § 5:
_animae autem eorum solam esse salutem, corpus enim natura corruptibile
existit_). The fundamental dualism of Basilides is confirmed also by one or
two other passages. In the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, Basilides
saw the proof of _naturam sine radice et sine loco rebus supervenientem_
(_Acta Archelai_). According to Clemens, _Strom._ iv. 12 § 83, &c.,
Basilides taught that even those who have not sinned in act, even Jesus
himself, possess a sinful nature. It is possibly also in connexion with the
dualism of his fundamental [v.03 p.0479] views that he taught the
transmigration of souls (Origen in _Ep. ad Rom_. lib. v.; Opp. de la Rue
iv. 549; cf. Clemens, _Excerpta ex Theodoto_, § 28). Isidorus set up
celibacy, though in a modified form, as the ideal of the perfect (Clemens,
_Strom_. iii. 1 § 1, &c.) Clemens accuses Basilides of a deification of the
Devil ([Greek: theiazein ton diabolon]), and regards as his two dogmas that
of the Devil and that of the transmigration of souls (_Strom_. iv. 12 § 85:
cf. v. 11 § 75). It is remarkable too that Isidorus held the existence of
two souls in man, a good and a bad (Clemens, _Strom_. ii. 20 113); with
which may be compared the teaching of Mani about the two souls, which it is
impossible to follow F, Ch. Baur in excluding,[2] and also the teaching of
the _Pistis Sophia_ (translated by C. Schmidt, p. 182, &c.). According to
Clemens (_Strom_. ii. 20 § 112), the followers of Basilides spoke of
[Greek: pneumata tina prosêrtêmena têi logikêi phuchêi kata tina tarachon
kai sunchusin archikên]: that is to say, here also is assumed an original
confusion and intermingling. Epiphanius too tells us that the teaching of
Basilides had its beginning in the question as to the origin of evil
(_Haer_. xxiv. 6).

Now, of this sharply-defined dualism there is scarcely a trace in the
system described by the Fathers of the Church. It is therefore only with
caution that we can use them to supplement our knowledge of the true
Basilides. The doctrine described by them that from the supreme God (the
_innatus pater_) had emanated 365 heavens with their spirits, answers
originally to the astronomical conception of the heavens with their 365
daily aspects (Irenaeus i. 24. 7; _Trecentorum autem sexaginta quinque
caelorum locales positiones distribuunt similiter ut mathematici_). When,
therefore, the supreme God is called by the name [Greek: Abrasax] or
[Greek: Abraxas], which contains the numerical value 365, it is worthy of
remark that the name of the Persian god Mithras ([Greek: Meithras]) also
was known in antiquity to contain this numerical value (Jerome in _Amos_ 3;
Opp. Vallarsi VI. i. 257). Speculations about the Perso-Hellenistic Mithras
appear to have been transferred to the Gnostic Abraxas. Further, if the
_Pater innatus_ be surrounded by a series of (from five to seven)
Hypostases (according to Irenaeus i. 24. 3; [Greek: Nous, Logos, Phronêsis,
Sophia, Dunamis]; according to Clemens, _Strom_. iv. 25 § 164, [Greek:
Dikaiosunê] and [Greek: Eirênê] may perhaps be added), we are reminded of
the _Ameshas-spentas_ which surround Ahura-Mazda. Finally, in the system of
Basilides, the (seven ?) powers from whom this world originates are
accepted as the lowest emanations of the supreme God. This conception which
is repeated in nearly every Gnostic system, of (seven) world-creating
angels, is a specifically oriental speculation. The seven powers which
create and rule the world are without doubt the seven planetary deities of
the later Babylonian religion. If, in the Gnostic systems, these become
daemonic or semi-daemonic forces, this points to the fact that a stronger
monotheistic religion (the Iranian) had gained the upper hand over the
Babylonian, and had degraded its gods to daemons. The syncretism of the
Babylonian and the Persian religion was also the nursing-ground of
Gnosticism. When, then, Basilides identified the highest angel of the
seven, the creator of the worlds, with the God of the Jews, this is a
development of the idea which did not occur until late, possibly first in
the specifically Christian circles of the Gnostics. We may note in this
connexion that the system of Basilides ascribes the many battles and
quarrels in the world to the privileged position given to his people by the
God of the Jews.[3]

It is at this point that the idea of salvation is introduced into the
system. The confusion in the world has meanwhile risen to such a pitch that
the supreme God sends his _Nous_, who is also called Christ, into the world
(Irenaeus i. 24. 4). According to Clemens, the Saviour is termed [Greek:
pneuma diakonoumenon] (_Strom_. ii. 8 § 36) or [Greek: diakonos] (_Excerpta
ex Theodoto_, § 16). It is impossible certainly to determine how Basilides
conceived the relation of this Saviour to Jesus of Nazareth. Basilides
himself (_Strom_. iv. 12 § 83) knows of an earthly Jesus and denies the
principle of his sinlessness (see above). According to the account given by
Irenaeus, the Saviour is said to have appeared only as a phantasm;
according to the _Excerpta ex Theodoto_, 17, the Diakonos descended upon
Jesus at His baptism in the form of a dove, for which reason the followers
of Basilides celebrated the day of the baptism of Jesus, the day of the
[Greek: epiphaneia]. as a high festival (Clemens, _Strom_. i. 21 § 18). The
various attempts at combination probably point to the fact that the purely
mythical figure of a god-saviour (Heros) was connected first by Basilides
with Jesus of Nazareth. As to what the conception of Basilides was of the
completion of the process of redemption, the available sources tell us next
to nothing. According to an allusion in Clemens, _Strom_. ii. 8 § 36, with
the mission of the Saviour begins the great separation of the sexes, the
fulfilment and the restoration of all things. This agrees with the
beginning of the speculation of Basilides. Salvation consists in this, that
that which was combined for evil is once more separated.

Among the later followers of Basilides, actual magic played a determining
part. They hand down the names of the rulers of the several heavens as a
weighty secret. This was a result of the belief, that whoever knew the
names of these rulers would after death pass through all the heavens to the
supreme God. In accordance with this, Christ also, in the opinion of these
followers of Basilides, was in the possession of a mystic name (Caulacau =
[Hebrew: QAW LAQAW] Jes. xxviii. 10) by the power of which he had descended
through all the heavens to earth, and had then again ascended to the
Father. Redemption, accordingly, could be conceived as simply the
revelation of mystic names. In this connexion the name Abraxas and the
Abraxas gems must be remembered. Whether Basilides himself had already
given this magic tendency to Gnosticism cannot be decided.

Basilides, then, represents that form of Gnosticism that is closest to
Persian dualism in its final form. His doctrine is most closely related to
that of Satornil (Saturninus). From most of the other Gnostic sects, with
the exception perhaps of the Jewish-Christian Gnosticism, he is
distinguished by the fact that with him the figure of the fallen female god
(Sophia Achamoth), and, in general, the idea of a fall within the godhead
is entirely wanting. So far as we can see, on the other hand, Basilides
appears actually to represent a further development of Iranian dualism,
which later produced the religious system of Mani.

Accounts of the teaching of Basilides are to be found in all the more
complete works on Gnosticism (see bibliography to the article GNOSTICISM).
The original sources are best reproduced in Hilgenfeld, _Ketzergeschichte
des Urchristentums_ (1884), pp. 195-230. See also Krüger, article
"Basilides," in Herzog-Hauck, _Realencyklopadie_, ed. 3.

(W. BO.)

[1] = Nimrod = Zoroaster, cf. Pseudo-Clement, _Homil._ ix. 3; _Recogn._ iv.
27.

[2] The materials are in Baur, _Das manichäische Religionssystem_ (1831),
p. 162, &c.

[3] Whether the myth of the creation of the first man by the angels, which
recurs in many Gnostic systems, found a place also in the system of
Basilides, cannot be determined with any certainty. Philastrius, however,
says: _hominem autem ab angelis factum asserit_, while according to
Epiphanus xxiv. 2, men are created by the God of the Jews.