BASKERVILLE, JOHN (1706-1775), English printer, was born at Wolverley in
Worcestershire on the 28th of January 1706. About 1726 he became a writing
master at Birmingham, and he seems to have had a great talent for
calligraphy and for cutting inscriptions in stone. While at Birmingham he
made some important improvements in the process of japanning, and gained a
considerable fortune. About the year 1750 he began to make experiments in
type-founding, producing types much superior in distinctness and elegance
to any that had hitherto been employed. He set up a printing-house, and in
1757 published his first work, a _Virgil_ in royal quarto, followed, in
1758, by his famous edition of Milton. In that year he was appointed
printer to the university of Cambridge, and undertook editions of the Bible
and the Book of Common Prayer. The _Horace_, published in 1762, is
distinguished even among the productions of the Baskerville press for its
correctness and for the beauty of the paper and type. A second _Horace_
appeared in 1770 in quarto, and its success encouraged Baskerville to
publish a series of quarto editions of Latin authors, which included
Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, Lucretius, Terence, Sallust and Florus.
This list of books issued by Baskerville from his press lends some irony to
the allegation that he was a person of no education. These books are
admirable specimens of typography; and Baskerville is deservedly ranked
among the foremost of those who have advanced the art of printing. His
contemporaries asserted that his books owed more to the quality of the
paper and ink than to the type itself, but the difficulty in obtaining
specimens from the Baskerville press shows the estimation in which they are
now held. His wife, Sarah Baskerville, carried on the business for some
time after his death, which took place on the 8th of January 1775.