BASQUES, a people inhabiting the three Basque Provinces--Biscay, Álava and
Guipúzcoa--and Navarre in Spain, and the arrondissement of Bayonne and
Mauléon in France. The number of those who can be considered in any sense
pure Basques is [v.03 p.0486] probably about 600,000 in Europe, with
perhaps 100,000 emigrants in the Americas, chiefly in the region of La
Plata in South America. The word Basques is historically derived from
_Vascones_, which, written _Wascones_, has also given the name _Gascons_ to
a very different race. The Basques call themselves _Eskualdunak_, _i.e._
"those who possess the _Eskuara_," and their country Eskual-Herria.

_Language_.--The original and proper name of the language is Eskuara
(euskara, uskara), a word the exact meaning of which has not yet been
ascertained, but which probably corresponds with the idea "clearly
speaking." The language is highly interesting and stands as yet absolutely
isolated from the other tongues of Europe, though from the purely
grammatical point of view it recalls the Magyar and Finnic languages. It is
an agglutinative, incorporating and polysynthetic system of speech; in the
general series of organized linguistic families it would take an
intermediate place between the American on the one side and the Ugro-Altaic
or Ugrian on the other.

Basque has no graphic system of its own and uses the Roman character,
either Spanish or French; a few particular sounds are indicated in modern
writings by dotted or accented letters. The alphabet would vary according
to the dialects. Prince L. L. Bonaparte counts, on the whole, thirteen
simple vowels, thirty-eight simple consonants. Nasal vowels are found in
some dialects as well as "wet" consonants--_ty_, _dy_, _ny_, &c. The
doubling of consonants is not allowed and in actual current speech most of
the soft consonants are dropped. The letter _r_ cannot begin a word, so
that _rationem_ is written in Basque _arrazoin_.

Declension is replaced by a highly developed postpositional system; first,
the definite article itself _a_ (plural _ak_) is a postposition--_zaldi_,
"horse," _zaldia_ "the horse," _zaldiak_, "the horses." The declensional
suffixes or postpositions, which, just like our prepositions, may be added
to one another, are postponed to the article when the noun is definite. The
principal suffixes are _k_, the mark of the plural, and of the singular
nominative agent; _n_, "of" and "in"; _i_, "to"; _z_, "by"; _ik_, "some";
_ko_, "from," "of" (Lat. _a_); _tik_, "from" (Lat. _ex_); _tzat_, _kotzat_,
_tzako_, "for"; _kin_, _gaz_, "with"; _gatik_, "for the sake of"; _gana_,
"towards"; _ra_, _rat_, "to," "into," "at," &c. Of these suffixes some are
joined to the definite, others to the indefinite noun, or even to both.

The personal pronouns, which to a superficial observer appear closely
related to those of the Semitic or Hamitic languages, are _ni_, "I"; _hi_,
"thou"; _gu_, "we"; _zu_, "you" in modern times, _zu_ has become a polite
form of "thou," and a true plural "you" (_i.e._ more than one) has been
formed by suffixing the pluralizing sign _k--zuek_. The pronouns of the
third person are mere demonstratives. There are three: _hura_ or _kura_,
"that"; _hau_ or _kau_, "this"; _ori_ or _kori_, "this" or "that." Other
unexplained forms are found in the verbal inflexions, _e.g._ _d_, _it_, and
_t_, "I" or "me"; _d-akus-t_, "it see I" = I see it; _d-arrai-t_, "it
follows me." The demonstratives are used as articles: _gazt-en-or_, "this
younger one"; _andre-ori_, "this lady at some distance." The reflective
"self" is expressed by _buru_, "head." The relative does not exist, and in
its place is used as a kind of verbal participle with the ending _n: doa_,
"he goes"; _doana_, "he who is going"; in the modern Basque, however, by
imitation of French or Spanish, the interrogative _zein_, _zoin_, is used
as a relative. Other interrogatives are _nor_, "who"; _zer_, "what";
_zembait_, "how much," &c. _Bat_, "one"; _batzu_, "several"; _bakotch_,
"each"; _norbait_, "some one"; _hanitz_ or _hainitz_, "much"; _elkar_,
"both"; are the most common indefinite pronouns. The numeral system is
vicesimal; _e.g._ 34 is _hogoi ta hamalaur_, "twenty and fourteen." The
numbers from one to ten are: 1, _bat_; 2, _bi_; 3, _hiru_; 4, _lau_; 5,
_bortz_ or _bost_; 6, _sei_; 7, _zazpi_; 8, _zortzi_; 9, _bederatzi_; 10,
_hamar_; 20, _hogoi_ or _hogei_; 40, _berrogoi_ (_i.e._ twice twenty); 100,
_ehun_. There is no genuine word for a thousand.

The genders in Basque grammar are distinguished only in the verbal forms,
in which the sex of the person addressed is indicated by a special suffix;
so that _eztakit_ means, "I do not know it"; but to a woman one says also:
_eztakinat_, "I do not know it, oh woman!" To a man one says: _eztakiat_
(for _eztakikat_), "I do not know it, oh man!" moreover, certain dialectic
varieties have a respectful form: _eztakizut_, "I do not know it, you
respectable one," from which also a childish form is derived, _eztakichut_,
"I do not know it, oh child!"

The Basque conjugation appears most complicated, since it incorporates not
only the subject pronouns, but, at the same time, the indirect and direct
complement. Each transitive form may thus offer twenty-four variations--"he
gives it," "he gives it to you," "he gives them to us," &c., &c.
Primitively there were two tenses only, an imperfect and a present, which
were distinguished in the transitive verb by the place of the personal
subject element: _dakigu_, "we are knowing it" (_gu_, _i.e._ we), and
_ginaki_, "we were knowing it"; in the intransitive by a nasalization of
the radical: _niz_, "I am"; _nintz_, "I was." In modern times a conjectural
future has been derived by adding the suffix _ke_, _dakiket_, "I will,
shall or probably can know it." No proper moods are known, but subjunctive
or conjunctive forms are formed by adding a final _n_, as _dakusat_, "I am
looking at it"; _dakusadan_, "if I see it." No voices appear to have been
used in the same radical, so that there are separate transitive and
intransitive verbs.

In its present state Basque only employs its regular conjugation
exceptionally; but it has developed, probably under the influence of
neo-Latin, a most extensive conjugation by combining a few auxiliary verbs
and what may be called participles, in fact declined nouns: _ikusten dut_,
"I have it in seeing," "I see it"; _ikusiko dut_, "I have it to be seen,"
"I will see it," &c. The principal auxiliaries are: _izan_, "to be"; and
_ukan_, "to have"; but _edin_, "to can"; _eza_, "to be able"; _egin_, "to
make"; _joan_, "to go"; _eroan_, "to draw," "to move," are also much used
in this manner.

The syntax is simple, the phrases are short and generally the order of
words is: subject, complement, verb. The determining element follows the
determined: _gizon handia_, "man great the"--the great man: the genitive,
however, precedes the nominative--_gizonaren etchea_, "the man's house."
Composition is common and it has caused several juxtaposed words to be
combined and contracted, so that they are partially fused with one
another--a process called _polysyntheticism; odei_, "cloud," and _ots_,
"noise," form _odots_, "thunder"; _belar_, "forehead," and _oin_, "foot,"
give _belaun_, "knee," front of the foot. The vocabulary is poor; general
and synthetic words are often wanting; but particular terms abound. There
is no proper term for "sister," but _arreba_, a man's sister, is
distinguished from _ahizpa_, a woman's sister. We find no original words
for abstract ideas, and God is simply "the Lord of the high."

The vocabulary, however, varies extremely from place to place and the
dialectic varieties are very numerous. They have been summed up by Prince
L. L. Bonaparte as eight; these may be reduced to three principal groups:
the eastern, comprising the Souletine and the two lower Navarrese; the
central formed by the two upper Navarrese, the Guipúzcoan and the
Labourdine; and the western, formed by the Biscayan, spoken too in Álava.
These names are drawn from the territorial subdivisions, although the
dialects do not exactly correspond with them.

_Ethnology and Anthropology._--The earliest notices of the geography of
Spain, from the 5th century B.C., represent Spain as occupied by a
congeries of tribes distinguished mainly as Iberi, Celtiberi and Celts.
These had no cohesion together, and unless temporarily united against some
foreign foe, were at war with one another and were in constant movement;
the ruder tribes being driven northwards by the advancing tide of
Mediterranean civilization. The tribes in the south in Baetica had,
according to Trogus and Strabo, written laws, poems of ancient date and a
literature. Of this nothing has reached us. We have only some inscriptions,
legends on coins, marks on pottery and on megalithic monuments, in
alphabets slightly differing, and belonging to six geographical districts.
These still await an interpreter; but they show that a like general
language was once spoken through the whole of Spain, and for a short
distance on [v.03 p.0487] the northern slope of the Pyrenees. The character
of the letters is clearly of Levant origin, but the particular alphabets,
to which each may be referred, and their connexion, if any, with the
Basque, are still undetermined. It was early remarked by the classical
scholars among the Basques after the Renaissance that certain names in the
ancient toponymy of Spain, though transcribed by Greek and Latin writers,
_i.e._ by foreigners, ignorant of the language, yet bear a strong
resemblance to actual place-names in Basque (_e.g._ Iliberis, Iriberry);
and in a few cases (Mondiculeia, Mendigorry; Iluro, Oloron) the site itself
shows the reason of the name. Andres de Poza (1587), Larramendi (1760),
Juan B. Erro (1806) and others had noted some of these facts, but it was W.
von Humboldt (1821) who first aroused the attention of Europe to them. This
greater extension of a people speaking a language akin to the Basque
throughout Spain, and perhaps in Sicily and Sardinia, has been accepted by
the majority of students, though some competent Basque scholars deny it;
and the certain connexion of the Basques, either with the Iberians or
Celtiberians, whether in race or language, cannot be said to be
conclusively proved as long as the so-called Celtiberian inscriptions
remain uninterpreted. (See also IBERIANS.)

After so many centuries of close contact and interpenetration with other
peoples, we can hardly expect to find a pure physical type among the
present Basques. All that we can expect is to be able to differentiate them
from their neighbours. The earliest notice we have of the Basques, by
Einhard (778), speaks of their wonderful agility. The next, the pilgrim of
the Codex Calixtinus (12th century), says the Basques are fairer in face
(_facie candiliores_) than the Navarrese.

Anthropologists no longer rely solely on craniology, and the measurement of
the skull, to distinguish race. The researches of Aranzadi (1889 and 1905)
and of Collignon (1899) show them as less fair than northern Europeans, but
fairer than any of the southern races; not so tall as the Scandinavians,
Teutons or British, but taller than their neighbours of southern races.
There is no tendency to prognathism, as in some of the Celts. The profile
is often very fine; the carriage is remarkably upright. Neither markedly
brachycephalous nor dolichocephalous, the skull has yet certain
peculiarities. In the conjunction of the whole physical qualities, says
Collignon, there is a Basque type, differing from all those he has studied
in Europe and northern Africa. There are differences of type among
themselves, yet, when they emigrate to South America, French and Spanish
Basques are known simply as Basques, distinct from all other races.

On the origin of the Basques, the chief theories are:--(1) that they are
descended from the tribes whom the Greeks and Latins called Iberi; (2) that
they belong to some of the fairer Berber tribes ("Eurafrican," Hervé) and
through the ancient Libyans, from a people depicted on the Egyptian
monuments; (3) the Atlantic theory, that they belong to a lost Atlantic
continent, whose inhabitants were represented by the Guanches of the Canary
Islands, and by a fair race on the western coast of Africa; (4) that they
are an indigenous race, who have never had any greater extension than their
present quarters.

The remains of prehistoric races hitherto discovered in Spain throw little
light on the subject, but some skulls found in southeastern Spain in the
age of metal resemble the Basque skulls of Zaraus.

The megalithic remains, the dolmens, menhirs, cromlechs and stone circles
are said to resemble more closely those of northern Africa than the larger
remains of Brittany and of the British Isles. Aristotle tells us that the
Iberi fixed obelisks round the tomb of each warrior in number equal to the
enemies he had slain (_Polit._ vii. c. 2. 6), but proof is wanting that
these Iberi were Basques.

Iberian inscriptions have been found on the so-called _toros de guisando_,
rude stone bulls or boars, on other monuments of northern Spain and in
ancient sepulchres; some of these figures, _e.g._ at the _Cerro de los
Santos_ in Murcia, recall the physical type of the modern Basques, but they
are associated with others of very varied types.

Of the religion of the Basques anterior to Christianity, little is
certainly known. The few notices we have point to a worship of the
elements, the sun, the moon and the morning star, and to a belief in the
immortality of the unburnt and unburied body. The custom of the _couvade_,
attributed by Strabo to the Cantabri, is unknown among the modern Basques.
As elsewhere, the Romans assimilated Basque local deities to their own
pantheon, thus we find Deo _Baicorrixo_ (Baigorry) and _Herauscorrtsehe_ in
Latin inscriptions. But the name which the Basques themselves give to the
Deity is _Jaincoa_, _Jaungoikoa_, which may mean lord or master, Lord of
the high; but in the dialect of Roncal, _Goikoa_ means "the moon," and
_Jaungoikokoa_ would mean "Lord of the moon." The term _Jaun_, lord or
master, _Etcheko Jauna_, the lord or master of the house, is applied to
every householder.

There is no aid to be got from folk-tales; none can be considered
exclusively Basque and the literature is altogether too modern. The first
book printed in Basque, the _Linguae Vasconum Primitiae_, the poems of
Bernard d'Echepare, is dated 1545. The work which is considered the
standard of the language is the Protestant translation of the New Testament
made by Jean de Liçarrague, under the auspices of Jeanne d'Albret, and
printed at La Rochelle in 1571. The _pastorales_ are open-air dramas, like
the moralities and mysteries of the middle ages. They are derived from
French materials; but a dancing chorus, invariably introduced, and other
parts of the _mise-en-scène_, point to possibly earlier traditions. No MS.
hitherto discovered is earlier than the 18th century. The greater part of
the other literature is religious and translated. It is only recently that
a real literature has been attempted in Basque with any success.

In spite of this modernity in literature there are other matters which show
how strong the conservatism of the Basques really is. Thus, in dealing with
the language, the only true measure of the antiquity of the race, we find
that all cutting instruments are of stone; that the week has only three
days. There are also other survivals now fast disappearing. Instead of the
plough, the Basques used the _laya_, a two-pronged short-handled steel
digging fork, admirably adapted to small properties, where labour is
abundant. They alone of the peoples of western Europe have preserved
specimens of almost every class of dance known to primitive races. These
are (1) animal (or possibly totem) dances, in which men personate animals,
the bear, the fox, the horse, &c.; (2) dances to represent agriculture and
the vintage performed with wine-skins; (3) the simple arts, such as
weaving, where the dancers, each holding a long coloured ribbon, dance
round a pole on which is gradually formed a pattern like a Scotch tartan;
(4) war-dances, as the sword-dance and others; (5) religious dances in
procession before the Host and before the altar; (6) ceremonial dances in
which both sexes take part at the beginning and end of a festival, and to
welcome distinguished people. How large a part these played in the life of
the people, and the value attached to them, may be seen in the vehement
defence of the religious dances by Father Larramendi, S.J., in his
_Corografia de Guipúzcoa_, and by the large sums paid for the privilege of
dancing the first _Saut Basque_ on the stage at the close of a _Pastorale_.

The old Basque house is the product of a land where stone and timber were
almost equally abundant. The front-work is of wood with carved beams; the
balconies and huge over-hanging roof recall the Swiss chalet, but the side
and back walls are of stone often heavily buttressed. The cattle occupy the
ground-floor, and the first storey is reached often by an outside
staircase. The carven tombstones with their ornaments resemble those of
Celtic countries, and are found also at Bologna in Italy.

In customs, in institutions, in administration, in civil and political life
there is no one thing that we can say is peculiarly and exclusively Basque;
but their whole system taken together marks them off from other people and
especially from their neighbours.

_Character_.--The most marked features in the Basque character are an
intense self-respect, a pride of race and an obstinate conservatism. Much
has been written in ridicule of the claim of all Basques to be noble, but
it was a fact both in the laws of [v.03 p.0488] Spain, in the _fueros_ and
in practice. Every Basque freeholder (_vecino_) could prove himself noble
and thus eligible to any office. They are not a town race; a Basque village
consists of a few houses; the population lives in scattered habitations.
They do not fear solitude, and this makes them excellent emigrants and
missionaries. They are splendid seamen, and were early renowned as whale
fishermen in the Bay of Biscay. They were the first to establish the
cod-fishery off the coast of Newfoundland. They took their full part in the
colonization of America. Basque names abound in the older colonial
families, and Basque newspapers have been published in Buenos-Aires and in
Los Angeles, California. As soldiers they are splendid marchers; they
retain the tenacity and power of endurance which the Romans remarked in the
Iberians and Celtiberians. They are better in defence than in attack. The
failure to take Bilbao was the turning-point in both Carlist wars. In civil
institutions and in the tenures of property the legal position of women was
very high. The eldest born, whether boy or girl, inherited the ancestral
property, and this not only among the higher classes but among the
peasantry also. In the _fueros_ an insult done to a woman, or in the
presence of a woman, is punished more severely than a similar offence among
men. This did not prevent women from working as hard as, or even harder
than, the men. All authors speak of the robust appearance of the
women-rowers on the Bidassoa, and of those who loaded and unloaded the
ships in Bilbao.

_Institutions_.--In their municipal institutions they kept the old Roman
term _respublica_ for the _civitas_ and the territory belonging to it. All
municipal officers were elective in some form or other, and there is hardly
any mode of election, from universal suffrage to nomination by a single
person chosen by lot, that the Basques have not tried. The municipalities
sent deputies to the juntas or parliaments of each province. These
assemblies took place originally in the open air, as in other parts of the
Pyrenees, under trees, the most celebrated of which is the oak of Guernica
in Biscay, or under copses, as the Bilzaar in the French Pays Basque. The
cortes of Navarre met at Pamplona. Delegates from the juntas met annually
to consider the common interests of the three provinces. Besides the
separate municipalities and the juntas, there were often associations and
assemblies of three or five towns, or of three or four valleys, to preserve
the special privilege or for the special needs of each. Hence was formed a
habit of self-government, the practice of legislative, judicial and
administrative functions, which resulted gradually in a code of written or
unwritten laws embodied in the _fueros_ or _fors_ of each province, and the
_cartas-pueblos_ of the towns. In form these _fueros_ or charters are often
grants from the lord or sovereign; in reality they are only a confirmation
or codification of unwritten customary laws in practice among the people,
the origin of which is lost in antiquity. The kings of Castile, of Spain
and of Navarre were obliged at their accession, either in person, or by
deputy, to swear to observe these _fueros_; and this oath was really kept.
While the cortes were trampled upon and absolutism reigned both in Spain
and in France, the Basque _fueros_ were respected; in Spain to the middle
of the 19th century and in France down to the Revolution. The _fueros_ thus
observed made the Basque provinces a land apart (_una tierra apartada_), a
self-governing republic (_una verdadera autonomia_), under an absolute
monarchy, to which, however, they were always loyal. And this independence
was acknowledged, not only in local, but also in international and European
treaties, as in art. 15 of the treaty of Utrecht 1713. So the act of the
3rd of June 1876, which assimilated the Basque Provinces to the rest of
Spain, acknowledged the true self-government which they had enjoyed for
centuries.

The circumstances and methods which enabled the Basques to preserve this
independence were, first, the isolation caused by their peculiar language;
next, the mountainous and easily-defended nature of the country, its
comparative poverty and the possession of a sea-board. Then there were the
rights and the safeguards which the _fueros_ themselves gave against
encroachments. The rights were:--freedom of election to all offices and to
the juntas; exemption from all forced military service except for the
defence of the country and under their own officers; and payment beforehand
exacted for all service beyond their own frontiers (this did not of course
exclude voluntary service of individuals in the Spanish or French armies).
Then there was free trade with foreign nations, and especially between the
Basques of both nations. The customs' frontier of Spain really began on the
Ebro. Then no decree or sentence of the royal authorities could have effect
in the provinces except countersigned by the junta. Otherwise the resisting
and even the killing of a royal officer was no murder. But chiefest of all
the safeguards was the provision that no tax or contribution should be
levied or paid to the crown till all petitions had been heard and wrongs
redressed; that such a vote should be the last act of the junta or cortes,
and the money should be paid not as a demand of right or a tax, but as a
free gift and above all a voluntary one. It was paid in a lump sum, and the
repartition and levying were left entirely in the hands of the junta and
the municipalities.

As a further precaution against the inroads of absolutism, no lawyer was
allowed to be a deputy to the junta and all clergy were likewise excluded.
The Basques considered that men of these professions would be always on the
side of tyranny. One lawyer (_letrado_) was present at the juntas for
consultation on the points of law, but he was not allowed to vote. So
strictly was this observed that after the battle of Vitoria in 1813, when
it was difficult to get together a quorum for the reorganization of the
country, the _letrado_, though one of the most active and influential
members in consultation, was not allowed to vote.

The relations between Church and State among the Basques have been very
remarkable. They are a highly religious people, eminently conservative in
their religious practices. In religion alone, through Ignatius de Loyola of
Guipúzcoa and Francis Xavier of Navarre, they have left their mark upon
Europe. They have kept the earliest form of Christian marriage and of the
primitive order of deaconesses, forgotten elsewhere in the West. The feast
of Corpus Christi instituted by Pope Urban IV. (1262) still appears in
Basque almanacs as _Phesta-berria_, the New Feast. The earliest notice that
we have of them speaks of their liberality to the clergy; yet with all this
religious conservatism they have never allowed themselves to be
priest-ridden. They constantly resisted the attempts of the crown to force
upon them the authority of the Spanish bishops. When Ferdinand the Catholic
came to Biscay in 1477 to swear to the _fueros_, he was compelled to send
back the bishop of Pamplona whom he had brought with him. No strange priest
could enter the town when the junta was sitting, and in some places if a
deputy was seen speaking to a priest before a session he lost his vote for
that day. The bishops had no share in ecclesiastical patronage in
Guipúzcoa; all was in the hands of the king, of the nobles or of the
municipalities, or else the priests were chosen by competitive examination
or elected by the people. They would not allow the priest to interfere with
the games or dances, and when the drama was forbidden in all Spain in 1757
by the authority of the Spanish bishops, the cortes of Navarre compelled
the king to withdraw the order.

For a stranger coming from lands of larger farms and apparently higher
cultivation, the agriculture of the Basques seems poor, but the old
scattered homesteads show a sense of security that has been lacking in many
parts of Spain; and the Basques have shown great adaptability in suiting
their agriculture to new conditions, helped by the presence of the courts
at San Sebastian and Biarritz. When the old self-sufficient village
industries declined, in consequence of the invention of machinery and
manufacture elsewhere, the Basques entered at once upon emigration to the
agricultural parts of the Americas, and the result has been that the Basque
Provinces and the Pays Basque probably have never been more prosperous than
they are now, and perhaps a new Eskual-herria and a new Eskuara are being
built up in the distant lands to which they are such valued immigrants.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--For so restricted a literature the _Essai d'une
bibliographie de la langue basque_, by Julien Vinson (Paris, 1891), with
the volume of additions and corrections, 1898, is practically exhaustive,
and is a mine of information on the principal works. See also for the
language, A. Oihenart, _Notitia utriusque Vasconiae_ (Paris. 1638 and
1656), 4to., ch. xiv.; Fl. Lecluse, _Manuel de la [v.03 p.0489] langue
basque_ (Toulouse, 1826); C. Ribary, _Essai sur la langue basque_ (1866),
translated from the Hungarian by Julien Vinson (Paris, 1877); W. J. Van
Eys, _Grammaire comparée des dialectes basques_ (Paris, London, Amsterdam,
1879); Prince L. L. Bonaparte, _Le Verbe basque en tableaux_ (London,
1864-1869); J. Vinson, articles in _Revue de linguistique_ (Paris,
1867-1906); L'Abbé Ithurry, _Grammaire basque_ (Bayonne, 1895-1906); Dr H.
Schuchardt, _Die Entstehung der Bezugsformen des Baskischen_ (Wien, 1893);
W. J. Van Eys, _Dictionnaire basque-français_ (Paris, 1873); R. M. de
Azkue, _Diccionario vascongado español-français_ (Tours, 1906); _Monumenta
Linguae Ibericae_, edidit Aemilius Hubner, fol. (Berlin, 1893) (texts and
introduction good; analysis and interpretation faulty). Other works of
interest on various subjects are:--Wentworth Webster, _Basque Legends_
(London, 1877 and 1879); Puyol y Camps, "La Epigraphia Numismatica
Iberica," in tomo xvi. of _Boletin de la Real Academia de la Historia_
(Madrid, 1890), (for geographical distribution of the alphabets); T. de
Aranzadi, _El Pueblo Euskalduna. Estudio de Antropologia_ (San Sebastian,
1889); and the same author's _Existe una raza Euskara? Sus caracteres
antropologicos_ (1905); _La Tradition au pays basque_ (Paris, 1899), (a
collection of papers by local authorities); Julien Vinson, _Les Basques et
le pays basque_ (Paris, 1882), a sufficient survey for the general reader;
the same author's _Le Folk-Lore du pays basque_ (Paris, 1883), treats of
the Pastorales and embraces the whole Folk-Lore; _Le Codex de Saint-Jacques
de Compostella_, lib. iv. (Paris, 1882), by R. P. F. Fita and J. Vinson,
gives the first Basque vocabulary; _Les Coutumes générales gardées et
observées au pais & baillage de Labourt_ (Bordeaux, 1700); G.
Olphe-Galliard, _Le Paysan basque à travers les âges_ (Paris, 1905); Pierre
Yturbide, _Le Pays de Labourd avant 1789_ (Bayonne, 1905), (for the time of
the English domination); Henry O'Shea, _La Tombe basque_ (Pau, 1889),
(valuable for the comparison of Basque and Celtic sepulchral ornament). See
also the bibliography to BASQUE PROVINCES.

(W. WE.; J. VN.)