BASSET HORN (Fr. _Cor de Basset_, or _Cor de Bassette_; Ger. _Bassethorn_,
_Basshorn_; Ital. _Corno di Bassetto_), a wood-wind instrument, not a
"horn," member of the clarinet family, of which it is the tenor. The basset
horn consists of a nearly cylindrical tube of wood (generally cocus or
box-wood), having a cylindrical bore and terminating in a metal bell wider
than that of the clarinet. For convenience in reaching the keys and holes,
the modern instrument is usually bent or curved either near the mouthpiece
or at the bell, which is turned upwards. The older models were bent in the
middle at an obtuse angle, and had at the bottom of the lower joint, near
the bell, a wooden block, inside which the bore was reflexed, and bent down
upon itself.[1] The basset horn has the same fingering as the clarinet, and
corresponds to the tenor of that instrument, being pitched a fifth below
the clarinet in C. The alto clarinet in Eb is often substituted for the
basset horn, especially in military bands, but the instruments differ in
three particulars:--(1) The basset horn has a metal bell instead of the
pear-shaped contracted bell of the alto clarinet. (2) The bore of the
basset horn is wider than that of the alto clarinet in Eb, or of the tenor
clarinet in F. (3) The tube of the basset horn is longer than that of the
clarinet, and contains four additional long keys, worked by the thumb of
the right hand, which in the clarinet is only used to steady the
instrument. These keys give the basset horn an extended compass of two
tones downwards to F [Notation: F2.] whereas the Eb clarinet only extends
to G [Notation: G2.] and the F clarinet to A [Notation: A2.] (actual
sounds). This brings the compass of the basset horn to a range of four
octaves from [Notation: C3 to C7.], actual sounds [Notation: F2 to F6.].

[v.03 p.0494] [Illustration: FIG. 1. (From photographs lent by M. Victor
Mahillon.)]

Like the clarinet, the basset horn is a transposing instrument, its music
being written a fifth higher than the actual sounds. The treble clef is
used in notation for all but the lowest register. The technical
capabilities of the basset horn are the same as for the clarinet, except
that the extra low notes from A to F (actual sounds) can only be intoned
slowly and _staccato_; the notes of the upper register being better
represented in the clarinet are seldom used in orchestral music.

The tone of the basset horn is extremely reedy and rich, especially in the
medium and low registers; the tone colour is similar to that of the
clarinet without its brilliancy; it is mellow and sensuous, but slightly
sombre, and therefore well adapted for music of an elegiac funereal
character.

The basset horn flourished mainly in Germany, where at the end of the 18th
century it was the favourite solo instrument of many celebrated
instrumentalists, such as Czerny, David, Lotz, Springer, &c. Among the
great masters, Mozart seems to have been foremost in his appreciation of
this beautiful instrument. In his _Requiem_, the reed family is represented
by two basset horns having independent parts, and two bassoons. Mozart has
also used the instrument with great effect in his opera _La Clemenza di
Tito_, where he has written a fine obbligato for it in the aria "Non piu di
Flori"; in _Zauberflöte_; and in chamber music, viz. short adagio for two
basset horns and bassoon, and another for two clarinets and three basset
horns (Series 10 of Breitkopf & Härtel's complete edition). Beethoven
employed it in his _Prometheus_ overture. Mendelssohn used it in military
music, and in two concerted pieces for clarinet and basset horn with
pianoforte accompaniment, in F and D min., opp. 113 and 114, dedicated to
Heinrich and Carl Bärmann.

The archetypes of the basset horn are the same as those of the clarinet
(_q.v._). The basset horn was the outcome of the desire, prevailing during
the 16th and 17th centuries, to obtain complete families of instruments to
play in concert. The invention of the basset horn in 1770 is attributed to
a clarinet maker of Passau, named Horn, whose name was given to the
instrument;[2] by a misnomer, the basset horn became known in Italy as
_corno di bassetto_, and in France as _cor de basset_. In 1782, Theodore
Lotz of Pressburg made some modifications in the instrument, which was
further improved by two instrumentalists of Vienna, Anton and Johann
Stadler, and finally in 1812 by Iwan Mueller, a famous clarinettist, who
invented the alto clarinet in Eb from the basset horn, by giving the latter
a construction and fingering analogous to those of the clarinet in Bb,
which he took as his model, instead of the clarinet in C.

See J. G. H. Backofen, _Anweisung zur Klarinette, nebst einer kurzen
Abhandlung über das Basset-Horn_, with illustration, p. 37 (Leipzig,
Breitkopf & Härtel, 1803); Iwan Mueller, _Anweisung zu der neuen Clarinette
und der Clarinette-alto, nebst einigen Bemerkungen für Instrumentenmacher_
(Leipzig, Freidrich Hofmeister, 1826, with illustrations); Gottfried Weber,
"Über Clarinette und Bassethorn," _Cacilia_, Band xi. pp. 35-37 (Mainz,
1834); Wilhelm Altenburg, _Die Clarinette, ihre Entstehung und Entwickelung
bis zur Jetztzeit in akustischer, technischer u. musikalischer Beziehung_
(Heilbronn, 1904), pp. 16-32; good heliogravures of early basset horns in
_Descriptive Catalogue of the Musical Instruments at the Royal Military
Exhibition, London_, 1890, compiled by Capt. C. R. Day (1891), pl. v.

(K. S.)

[1] An instrument of this type, stamped "H. Grenser, S. Wiesner, Dresden,"
is in the collection of the Rev. F. W. Galpin, of Hatfield, Broad Oak.

[2] _Cantor Lectures on Musical Instruments, their Construction and
Capabilities_, by A. J. Hipkins, p. 15; Henri Lavoix, _Histoire de
l'instrumentation depuis le seizième siècle jusqu'à nos jours_ (Paris,
1878), on p. 123 the date is given as 1777.