BASSOON (Fr. _basson_; Ger. _Fagott_; Ital. _fagotto_), a woodwind
instrument with double reed mouthpiece, a member of the oboe (_q.v._)
family, of which it is the bass. The German and Italian names of the
instrument were bestowed from a fancied resemblance to a bundle of sticks,
the bassoon being the first instrument of the kind to be doubled back upon
itself; its direct ancestor, the bass pommer, 6 ft. in length, was quite
straight. The English and French names refer to the pitch of the instrument
as the bass of the wood-wind.

The bassoon is composed of five pieces, which, when fitted together, form a
wooden tube about 8 ft. long (93 in.) with a conical bore tapering from a
diameter of 1¾ in., at the bell, to 3/16 in. at the reed. The tube is
doubled back upon itself, the shorter joint extending to about two-thirds
of the length of the longer, whereby the height of the instrument is
reduced to about 4 ft. The holes are brought into a convenient position for
the fingers by the device of boring them obliquely through the thickness of
the wood. The five pieces are:--(1) the bell; (2) the long joint, forming
the upper part of the instrument when played, although its notes are the
lowest in pitch; (3) the wing overlapping the long joint and having a
projecting flap through which are bored three holes; (4) the butt or lower
end of the instrument (when played) containing the double bore necessitated
by the abrupt bend of the tube upon itself. Both bores are pierced in one
block of wood, the prolongation of the double tube being usually stopped by
a flat oval pad of cork in the older models, whereas the modern instruments
have instead a U-shaped tube; (5) the crook, a narrow curved metal tube
about 12 in. long, to which is attached the double reed forming the
mouthpiece.

The performer holds the instrument in a diagonal position; the lower part
of the tube (the butt joint) played by the right hand resting against his
right thigh, and the little bell, turned upwards, pointing over his left
shoulder; a strap round the neck affords additional support. The notes are
produced by means of seven holes and 16, 17, or 19 keys. The mechanism and
fingering are very intricate. Theoretically the whole construction of the
bassoon is imperfect and arbitrary, important acoustic principles being
disregarded, but these mechanical defects only enhance its value as an
artistic musical instrument. The player is obliged to rely very much on his
ear in order to obtain a correct intonation, and next to the strings no
instrument gives greater scope to the artist.

The bassoon has an eight foot tone, the compass extending from Bb bass [1]
[Notation: B1b.] to Ab treble [Notation: A4b.], or in modern instruments by
means of additional mechanism to C or even F [Notation: C5 or F5.]. These
extra high notes are from their extreme sweetness called _vox humana_. The
pitch of the bassoon apparently lies two octaves below that of the oboe,
since the lowest note of both is B, but in reality the interval is only a
twelfth, as may be ascertained by comparing their fundamental scales. On
the bassoon the fundamental scale is that of F maj., obtained by opening
and closing the holes; the notes downwards from F to Bb [Notation: F2 to
B1b.] are extra notes obtained by means of interlocking keys on the long
joint, worked by the left thumb; they have no counterpart on the oboe and
do not belong to the fundamental scale of the bassoon. The fundamental
scale of the oboe is that of C, although the compass has been extended a
tone to Bb [Notation: B3b.]. Therefore the difference in pitch between the
bassoon and the oboe is a twelfth. In the first [v.03 p.0496] register of
the bassoon, seven semitones [Notation: B1b to E2.] are obtained, as stated
above, by means of keys in the long joint and bell; the next eight notes
(holes and keys) each produce two sounds--the fundamental tone, and, by
increased pressure of the breath, its harmonic octave. The remaining notes
are obtained by cross fingering and by overblowing the notes of the
fundamental scale a twelfth as far as Ab [Notation: A4b.] which forms the
normal compass. From A to Eb the _vox humana_ notes are produced by the
help of small harmonic holes opened by means of keys at the top of the wind
joint; exceptional players obtain, without additional keys, two or more
higher harmonic notes, which, however, are only used by _virtuosi_. This
then forms the intricate scheme of fingering for the bassoon, and in order
to appreciate the efforts of such instrument makers as Carl Almenräder in
Germany, Triebert and Jancourt in France, Sax in Belgium, Cornelius Ward
and Morton in England, to introduce improvements based upon acoustic
principles, it is necessary to understand what these general principles
are, and why they have been disregarded in the bassoon. In all tubes the
note given by the vibrating air column is influenced directly by the length
of the tube, but very little, if at all, by the diameter of the bore. The
pitch, however, is greatly affected by the diameter of the opening, whether
lateral or at the bell, through which the vibrating column of air is again
brought into communication with the outer air. The tube only sounds the
normal note in proportion to its length, when the diameter of the lateral
opening is equal to the internal diameter of the tube at the opening. As in
most of our early wood-wind instruments the holes would in that case have
been too large to be stopped by the fingers, and key-mechanism was still
primitive, instrument-makers resorted to the expedient of substituting a
hole of smaller diameter nearer the mouthpiece for one of greater diameter
in the position the hole should theoretically occupy. This important
principle was well understood by the Romans, and perhaps even by the
ancient Greeks, as is proved by existing specimens of the aulos (_q.v._)
and by certain passages from the classics.[2]

Another curious acoustic phenomenon bears upon the construction of wind
instruments, and especially upon the bassoon. When the diameter of the
lateral opening or bell is smaller than that of the bore, the portion of
the tube below the hole, which should theoretically be as though
non-existent, asserts itself, lowering the pitch of the note produced at
the hole and damping the tone; this is peculiarly noticeable in the A of
the bassoon [Notation: A2.] whose hole is much too high and too small in
diameter.[3] To cite an example of the scope of Carl Almenräder's
improvements in the bassoon, he readjusted the position of the A hole,
stopped by the third finger of the right hand, boring lower down the tube,
not one large hole, but two of medium diameter, covered by an open key to
be closed by the same finger from the accustomed position; one of these A
holes communicates with the narrower bore in the butt joint, and the other
with the wider bore. The effect is a perfectly clear, full and accurate
tone. Almenräder's other alterations were made on the same principle, and
produced an instrument more perfect mechanically and theoretically than
Savary's, but lacking some of the characteristics of the bassoon. In
Germany Almenräder's improvements[4] have been generally adopted and his
model with 16 keys is followed by most makers, and notably by Heckel of
Biebrich.[5]

The unwieldy bass pommers of the 15th and 16th centuries led to many
attempts to produce a more practical bass for the orchestra by doubling
back the long tube of the instrument. Thus transformed, the pommer became a
fagotto. The invention of the bassoon or fagotto is ascribed to Afranio, a
canon of Ferrara, in a work by his nephew, Theseus Ambrosius Albonesius,
entitled _Introductio in Chaldaicam Linguam ... et descriptio ac Simulacrum
Phagoti Afranii_ (Pavia, 1539). The illustration of the instrument, showing
front and back views (p. 179), taken in conjunction with the detailed
description (pp. 33-38), at once disposes of the suggestion that the
phagotus of Afranio and the fagotto or bassoon were in any way related; the
author himself is greatly puzzled as to the etymology of the word. The
phagotus in fact, resembles nothing so much as the musical curiosity known
as _flûte-à-bec à colonne_[6], but double and played by bellows, assigned
by G. Chouquet to the 16th century. This flute consisted of a column, with
base and capital, both stopped, the vent and the whistle being concealed
within perforated brass boxes, in the upper and lower parts of the column.
Afranio's phagotus consisted of two similar twin columns with base and
capital containing finger-holes and keys; between the columns in front was
a shorter column for ornament, and at the back of it another still shorter
whose capital could be lifted, and a sort of bellows or bag-pipe inserted
by means of which the instrument was sounded. The first instrument was
made, we are told, by Ravilius of Ferrara, from Afranio's design.[7]
Mersenne[8], who does not seem to have any difficulty in understanding the
construction of Afranio's phagotus, does not consider him the inventor of
the fagotto or bassoon, but of another kind of fagotto which he classes
with the Neapolitan _sourdeline_, a complicated kind of musette[9] (see
BAG-PIPE). Afranio's instrument consists, he states, of two _bassons_ as it
were interconnected by tubes and blown by bellows. As in the _sourdeline_,
these only speak when the springs (keys) are open. He disposes of Theseus
Albonesius's fanciful etymology of the name by showing it to be nothing but
the French word _fagot_, and that it was applied because the instrument
consists of two or more "flutes," bound or _fagotées_ together. There is no
evidence that the phagotus contained a reed, which would account for
Mersenne calling the pipes flutes. Mersenne's statements thus seem to
uphold the theory that Afranio's phagotus was only a double _flûte à
colonne_ with bellows. Evidence is at hand that in 1555 a contrabass wind
instrument was well known as fagotto. In the catalogue of the musical
instruments belonging to the Flemish band of Marie de Hongrie in Spain, we
find the following: "Ala dicha prinçesa y al dicho matoto dos ynstrumentos
de musica contrabaxos, que llaman fagotes, metidos en dos caos redondas
como pareçe por el dicho entrego."[10] Sigmund Schnitzer[11] of Nuremberg
(d. 1578), a maker of wind instruments who attained considerable notoriety,
has been [v.03 p.0497] named as the probable author of the transformation
of pommer into bassoon.

We learn from an historical work of the 18th century, that he was renowned
"almost everywhere" as a maker of _fagotte_ of extraordinary size, of
skilful workmanship and pure intonation, speaking easily. Schnitzer's
instruments were so highly appreciated not only all over Germany, but also
in France and Italy, that he was kept continually at work producing
_fagotte_ for lovers of music.[12]

An earlier chronicler of the artistic celebrities and craftsmen of
Nuremberg, Johann Neudorfer, writing in 1549,[13] names Sigmund Schnitzer
merely as _Pfeifenmacher und Stadtpfeifer._ Had he been also noted as an
inventor of a new form of instrument, the fellow-citizen and contemporary
chronicler would not have failed to note the fact. If Schnitzer had been
the first to reduce the great length of the bass pommer by doubling the
tube back upon itself, he would hardly have been handed down to posterity
as the clever craftsman _who made fagottos of extraordinary size_;
Doppelmaier, who chronicles in these eulogistic terms, wrote nearly two
centuries after the supposed invention of the fagotto, the value of which
was realized later by retrospection.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Old English double curtail (before 1688). (From
Harl MS 2034 in Brit. Mus.)]

An explanation may perhaps be found in Eisel's statement about the
_Deutscher Basson_, which he distinguishes from the _Basson_ (our bassoon).
"The _Deutsche Bassons_, Fagotte or Bombardi, as our German ancestors
termed them, before music was clothed in Italian and French style, are no
longer in use" (Eisel wrote in 1738) "and therefore it is unnecessary to
waste paper on them."[14] This refers, of course, to the _bombard_ or bass
pommer, the extraordinarily long instruments which Schnitzer made so
successfully. From this it would seem that our bassoon was not of German
origin. In the meanwhile we get a clue to the early history of the pommer
in transition, but we find it under a different name in no way connected
with _fagotto_. In order to shorten the unwieldy proportions of the tenor
pommer in C, and to increase its portability, it was constructed out of a
block of wood of rather more than double the diameter of the pommer, in
which two bores were cut, communicating at the bottom of the instrument
which was flat. The bell and the crook containing the double reed
mouthpiece were side by side at the top. This instrument, which had six
holes in front and one at the back as well as two keys, was known as the
_dulceian, dolcian, douçaine_, and also in France as _courtaud_ and in
England as the _curtail_, _curtal_,[15] _curtoll_, &c., being mentioned in
1582--"The common bleting musick of ye Drone, Hobius (Hautboy) and
Curtoll." The next step in the evolution produced the double curtail, a
converted bass pommer an octave below the single curtail and therefore
identical in pitch as in construction with the early fagotto in C. The
instrument is shown in fig. 2, the reproduction of a drawing in the MS. of
_The Academy of Armoury_ by Randle Holme,[16] written some time before
1688. At the side of the drawing is the following description: "A double
curtaile.[17] This is double the bigness of the single, mentioned ch. xvi.
n. 6" (the MS. begins at ch. xvii. of bk. 3) "and is played 8 notes deeper.
It is as it were 2 pipes fixed in on(e) thick bass pipe, one much longer
than the other, from the top of the lower comes a crooked pipe of brass in
which is fixed a reed, through it the wind passeth to make the instrument
make a sound. It hath 6 holes on the outside and one on that side next the
man or back part and 2 brass keys, the highest called double _La sol re_,
and the other double _B mi_."

We may therefore conclude that the satirical name _fagotto_, presumably
bestowed in Italy, since the French equivalent _fagot_ was never used for
the _basson_, was not necessarily applied to the new form of pommer at the
outset, but in any case before 1555; that the very term _Phagoto
d'Afranio_, by which the instrument was known during its short fabulous
existence, with its pretended Greek etymology, presupposes the
pre-existence in Italy of another _fagotto_ with which Afranio was
acquainted, perhaps imperfectly. Afranio's was the age of ingenious
mechanical devices applied to musical instruments, many of which, like
Afranio's, being mere freaks, did not survive the inventor. A document
selected from the valuable archives published by Edm. van der Straeten[18]
suggests a satisfactory clue. In 1426 Louis Willay, a musical instrument
maker of Bruges, sold to Philippe le Bon a triple set of wood-wind
instruments, _i.e._ "4 bombardes, 4 douçaines and 4 flûtes," to be sent as
a gift to Nicolas III., marquis of Ferrara. The new instrument, the
douçaine, we may imagine, by its unusual appearance provoked the satirical
wit of some courtier, and was henceforth known as _fagotto_. Just a century
later Ravilius of Ferrara made Afranio's first phagotus from the inventor's
design.

The bassoon has been a favourite with all the great masters, excepting
Handel. Beethoven uses the bassoon largely in his symphonies, writing
everywhere for it independent parts of great beauty and originality. Bach,
in his mass in B min., has parts for two bassoons. Mozart wrote a concerto
in Bb for bassoon, with orchestra (Kochel, No. 191). Weber has also written
a concerto for bassoon in F (op. 75), scored for full orchestra.

See also Etienne Ozi, _Nouvelle Methode du Bassoon_ (Paris, 1788 and 1800);
J. B. J. Willent-Bordogny, _Gran Methodo completo per il Fagotto_ (Milan,
1844), with illustrations of early bassoons (English edition, London, J. R.
Lafleur & Son); Joseph Fröhlich, _Vollständige Musikschule für alle beym
Orchester gebrauchliche wichtigere Instrumente_ (many practical
illustrations) (Cologne, Bonn, 1811); article "Bassoon," by W. H. Stone and
D. J. Blaikley in Grove's _Dictionary of Music and Musicians_ (2nd ed.);
article "Fagott" in Mendel's _Musikalisches Conversations-Lexikon_; for the
history of the instrument, and of its prototypes, see OBOE and BOMBARD.

(K. S.)

[1] At Wagner's instigation, the wind-instrument-maker, W. Heckel of
Biebrich-am-Rhein, made bassoons with an extra key, extending the compass
downwards to A.

[2] Macrobius in _Somn. Scip._ lib. ii. cap. 4. 5.

[3] Gottfried Weber, "Verbesserungen des Fagotts," in _Cacilia_ (Mainz,
1825), vol. ii. p. 123.

[4] See _Traité sur le perfectionnement du basson, avec 2 tableaux, par
Charles Almenräder_ (Mayence, Schott), and also the above mentioned article
by Gottfried Weber in _Cacilia_, whose explanations are clearer than those
of the inventor.

[5] For a description of the modern instrument see Victor Charles Mahillon,
_Catalogue descriptif et analytique du musée instrumental du Conservatoire
Royal de Musique_ (Bruxelles, 1896), vol. ii. pp. 275-276, No. 999.

[6] As far as is known only three of these curious instruments are in
existence; two in the museum of the Conservatoire, Paris, and one in
Brussels; all three bear a trefoil as maker's mark; the smallest, in F, is
reproduced in the _Catalogue of the Musical Instruments exhibited at the
Royal Military Exhibition, London_, 1890, by Capt. C. R. Day (London,
1891), pl. iv. F. It is also described (without illustration) in Mahillon's
_Catalogue_, p. 201, No. 189. The two flutes in Paris, measuring 73 cm. and
94 cm., are described by Gustave Chouquet, _Le Musée du Conservatoire
National de Musique--Catalogue descriptif et raisonné_ (Paris, 1884), Nos.
409 and 410, p. 106.

[7] An Italian translation of the description is given by Count L. F.
Valdrighi in _Musurgiana_, No. 4 (Milano, 1881), "Il Phagotus di Afranio,"
p. 40 et seq. (without illustration). An illustration of the phagotus is
given by W. J. von Wasielewski in _Gesch. d. Instrumentalmusik im XVI.
Jahrh._ (Berlin, 1878), pl. v. and vi., text p. 74.

[8] See _L'Harmonie universelle_ (Paris, 1636), part ii. p. 305.

[9] Ibid., illustrated and described, bk. v. p. 293.

[10] See Edm. van der Straeten, _Hist. de la musique aux Pays-Bas_, vol.
vii. pp. 433, 436, 448.

[11] J. J. Quantz, Frederick the Great's flute-master, gives France the
credit of transforming the bombard (pommer) into the bassoon, and the
schalmey into oboe, see _Versuch einer Anweisung die Flote traversière zu
spielen_ (Berlin, 1752), p. 24 and again p. 241, § 6.

[12] J. G. Doppelmaier, _Historische Nachricht von den Nürnbergischen
Mathematicis und Künstlern_ (Nürnberg, 1730), p. 293.

[13] See "Nachrichten von Künstlern und Werkleuten Nürnbergs aus dem Jahre
1549," in R. Eitelberger von Edelberg's _Quellenschriften für
Kunstgeschichte und Kunsttechnik des Mittelalters_ (Vienna. 1875), vols.
viii.-x.

[14] See J. J. Eisel, _Musicus autodidactus oder der sich selbst
informierende Musicus_ (Erfurt, 1738), pp. 104 and 100, and also J.
Mattheson, _Das neu-eröffnete Orchester_ (Hamburg, 1713), "Basson," from
whom Eisel borrowed.

[15] See the _New English Dictionary_, and Bateman upon Bartholinus, 423,
1, margin.

[16] British Museum, Harl. MS. 2034, fol. 207_b_, a reference communicated
by Augustus Hughes-Hughes from his valuable appendix to part iii.
(Instrumental Music and Works on Music) of a _Catalogue of MS. Music in the
British Museum_ (London, 1908-1909). The Appendix contains a list of
typical musical instruments represented in illuminated MSS., or described
in other MSS. in the British Museum, with a brief description and full
references.

[17] Compare Randle Holme's _double curtail_ with the dolcian in C, pl. vi.
H. of Capt. C. R. Day's catalogue, and with a dolcian or single curtail by
J. C. Denner in Paul de Wit's _Katalog des Musikhistorischen Museums von
Paul de Wit_ (Leipzig, 1903), p. 127, No. 380, and illust. p. 121
(Collection now transferred to Cologne). Consult also Mersenne, _op. cit_.,
and Michael Praetorius, _Syntagma Musicum_ (Wolfenbüttel, 1618), both of
whom describe and figure these forms of early bassoons.

[18] _Op. cit_. vol. vii. p. 38.