ARMY (from Fr. _armée_, Lat. _armata_), a considerable body of men armed
and organized for the purpose of warfare on land (Ger. _Armee_), or the
whole armed force at the disposal of a state or person for the same
purpose (Ger. _Heer_ = host). The application of the term is sometimes
restricted to the permanent, active or regular forces of a state. The
history of the development of the army systems of the world is dealt
with in this article in sections 1 to 38, being followed by sections 39
to 59 on the characteristics of present-day armies. The remainder of the
article is devoted to sections on the history of the principal armies of
Europe, and that of the United States. For the Japanese Army see JAPAN,
and for the existing condition of the army in each country see under the
country heading.

GENERAL HISTORY

1. _Early Armies._--It is only with the evolution of the specially
military function in a tribe or nation, expressed by the separation of a
warrior-class, that the history of armies (as now understood) commences.
Numerous savage tribes of the present day possess military organizations
based on this system, but it first appears in the history of
civilization amongst the Egyptians. By the earliest laws of Egypt,
provision was made for the support of the warriors. The exploits of her
armies under the legendary Sesostris cannot be regarded as historical,
but it appears certain that the country possessed an army, capable of
waging war in a regular fashion, and divided thus early into separate
arms, these being chariots, infantry and archers. The systems of the
Assyrians and Babylonians present no particular features of interest,
save that horsemen, as distinct from charioteers, appear on the scene.
The first historical instance of a military organization resembling
those of modern times is that of the Persian empire.

2. _Persia._--Drawn from a hardy and nomadic race, the armies of Persia
at first consisted mainly of cavalry, and owed much of their success to
the consequent ease and rapidity of their movements. The warlike
Persians constantly extended their power by fresh conquests, and for
some time remained a distinctly conquering and military race, attaining
their highest power under Cyrus and Cambyses. Cyrus seems to have been
the founder of a comprehensive military organization, of which we gather
details from Xenophon and other writers. To each province was allotted a
certain number of soldiers as standing army. These troops, formed
originally of native Persians only, were called the king's troops. They
comprised two classes, the one devoted exclusively to garrisoning towns
and castles, the other distributed throughout the country. To each
province was appointed a military commander, responsible for the number
and efficiency of the troops in his district, while the civil governor
was answerable for their subsistence and pay. Annual musters were held,
either by the king in person or by generals deputed for the purpose and
invested with full powers. This organization seems to have fully
answered its original purpose, that of holding a vast empire acquired by
conquest and promptly repelling inroads or putting down insurrections.
But when a great foreign war was contemplated, the standing army was
augmented by a levy throughout the empire. The extent of the empire made
such a levy a matter of time, and the heterogeneous and unorganized mass
of men of all nations so brought together was a source of weakness
rather than strength. Indeed, the vast hosts over which the Greeks
gained their victories comprised but a small proportion of the true
Persians. The cavalry alone seems to have retained its national
character, and with it something of its high reputation, even to the
days of Alexander.

3. _Greece._--The Homeric armies were tribal levies of foot, armed with
spear, sword, bow, &c., and commanded by the chiefs in their
war-chariots. In historic times all this is changed. Greece becomes a
congeries of city-states, each with its own citizen-militia. Federal
armies and permanent troops are rare, the former owing to the
centrifugal tendency of Greek politics, the latter because the
"tyrannies," which must have relied very largely on standing armies to
maintain themselves, had ultimately given way to democratic
institutions. But the citizen-militia of Athens or Sparta resembled
rather a modern "nation in arms" than an auxiliary force. Service was
compulsory in almost all states, and as the young men began their career
as soldiers with a continuous training of two or three years, Hellenic
armies, like those of modern Europe, consisted of men who had undergone
a thorough initial training and were subsequently called up as required.
Cavalry, as always in the broken country of the Peloponnesus, was not of
great importance, and it is only when the theatre of Greek history is
extended to the plains of Thessaly that the mounted men become numerous.
In the 4th century the mainstay of Greek armies was the _hoplite_
([Greek: hoplitaes]), the heavy-armed infantryman who fought in the
_corps de bataille_; the light troops were men who could not provide the
full equipment of the hoplite, rather than soldiers trained for certain
special duties such as skirmishing. The fighting formation was that of
the _phalanx_, a solid corps of hoplites armed with long spears. The
armies were recruited for each war by calling up one or more classes of
men in reserve according to age. It was the duty and privilege of the
free citizen to bear arms; the slaves were rarely trusted with weapons.

4. _Sparta._--So much is common to the various states. In Sparta the
idea of the nation in arms was more thoroughly carried out than in any
other state in the history of civilization. In other states the
individual citizen often lived the life of a soldier, here the nation
lived the life of a regiment. Private homes resembled the "married
quarters" of a modern army; the unmarried men lived entirely in
barracks. Military exercises were only interrupted by actual service in
the field, and the whole life of a man of military age was devoted to
them. Under these circumstances, the Spartans maintained a practically
unchallenged supremacy over the armies of other Greek states; sometimes
their superiority was so great that, like the Spanish regulars in the
early part of the Dutch War of Independence, they destroyed their
enemies with insignificant loss to themselves. The surrender of a
Spartan detachment, hopelessly cut off from all assistance, and the
victory of a body of well-trained and handy light infantry over a closed
battalion of Spartiates were events so unusual as seriously to affect
the course of Greek history.

5. _Greek Mercenaries._--The military system of the 4th century was not
called upon to provide armies for continuous service on distant
expeditions. When, after the earlier campaigns of the Peloponnesian War,
the necessity for such expeditions arose, the system was often strained
almost to breaking point, (e.g. in the case of the Athenian expedition
to Syracuse), and ultimately the states of Greece were driven to choose
between unprofitable expenditure of the lives of citizens and recruiting
from other sources. Mercenaries serving as light troops, and
particularly as _peltasts_ (a new form of disciplined "light infantry")
soon appeared. The _corps de bataille_ remained for long the old phalanx
of citizen hoplites. But the heavy losses of many years told severely on
the resources of every state, and ultimately non-national
recruits--adventurers and soldiers of fortune, broken men who had lost
their possessions in the wars, political refugees, runaway slaves,
&c.--found their way even into the ranks of the hoplites, and Athens at
one great crisis (407) enlisted slaves, with the promise of citizenship
as their reward. The Arcadians, like the Scots and the Swiss in modern
history, furnished the most numerous contingent to the new professional
armies. A truly national army was indeed to appear once more in the
history of the Peloponnesus, but in the meantime the professional
soldier held the field. The old bond of strict citizenship once broken,
the career of the soldier of fortune was open to the adventurous Greek.
Taenarum and Corinth became regular _entrepôts_ for mercenaries. The
younger Cyrus raised his army for the invasion of Persia precisely as
the emperors Maximilian and Charles V. raised regiments of
_Landsknechte_--by the issue of recruiting commissions to captains of
reputation. This army became the famous Ten Thousand. It was a marching
city-state, its members not desperate adventurers, but men with the calm
self-respect of Greek civilization. On the fall of its generals, it
chose the best officers of the army to command, and obeyed implicitly.
Cheirisophus the Spartan and Xenophon the Athenian, whom they chose,
were not plausible demagogues; they were line officers, who, suddenly
promoted to the chief command under circumstances of almost overwhelming
difficulty, proved capable of achieving the impossible. The merit of
choosing such leaders is not the least title to fame of the Ten Thousand
mercenary Greek hoplites. About the same time Iphicrates with a body of
mercenary _peltasts_ destroyed a _mora_ or corps of Spartan hoplites
(391 B.C.).

6. _Epaminondas._--Not many years after this, Spartan oppression roused
the Theban revolt, and the Theban revolt became the Theban hegemony. The
army which achieved this under the leadership of Epaminondas, one of the
great captains of history, had already given proofs of its valour
against Xenophon and the Cyreian veterans. Still earlier it had won the
great victory of Delium (424 B.C.).

It was organized, as were the professional armies, on the accepted model
of the old armies, viz. the phalangite order, but the addition of
peltasts now made a Theban army, unlike the Spartans, capable of
operating in broken country as well as in the plain. The new tactics of
the phalanx, introduced by Epaminondas, embodied, for the first time in
the history of war, the modern principle of local superiority of force,
and suggested to Frederick the Great the famous "oblique order of
battle." Further, the cavalry was more numerous and better led than that
of Peloponnesian states. The professional armies had well understood the
management of cavalry; Xenophon's handbook of the subject is not without
value in the 20th century. In Greek armies the dearth of horses and the
consequent numerical weakness of the cavalry prevented the bold use of
the arm on the battlefield (see CAVALRY). But Thebes had always to deal
with nations which possessed numerous horsemen. Jason of Pherae, for
instance, put into the field against Thebes many thousands of Thessalian
horse; and thus at the battle of Tegyra in 375 the Theban cavalry under
Pelopidas, aided by the _corps d'êlite_ of infantry called the Sacred
Band, carried all before them. At Leuctra Epaminondas won a glorious
victory by the use of his "oblique order" tactics; the same methods
achieved the second great victory of Mantineia (362 B.c.) at which
Epaminondas fell. Pelopidas had already been slain in a battle against
the Thessalians, and there was no leader to carry on their work. But the
new Greek system was yet to gain its greatest triumphs under Alexander
the Great.

7. _Alexander._--The reforms of Alexander's father, Philip of Macedon,
may most justly be compared to those of Frederick William I. in Prussia.
Philip had lived at Thebes as a hostage, and had known Iphicrates,
Epaminondas and Pelopidas. He grafted the Theban system of tactics on to
the Macedonian system of organization. That the latter--a complete
territorial system--was efficient was shown by the fact that Philip's
blow was always struck before his enemies were ready to meet it. That
the new Greek tactics, properly used, were superior to the old was once
more demonstrated at Chaeronea (338 B.C.), where the Macedonian infantry
militia fought in phalanx, and the cavalry, led by the young Alexander,
delivered the last crushing blow. On his accession, like Frederick the
Great, Alexander inherited a well-trained and numerous army, and was not
slow to use it. The invasion of Asia was carried out by an army of the
Greek pattern, formed both of Hellenes and of non-Hellenes on an
exceedingly strong Macedonian nucleus. Alexander's own guard was
composed of picked horse and foot. The infantry of the line comprised
Macedonian and Greek hoplites, the Macedonians being subdivided into
heavy and medium troops. These fought in a grand phalanx, which was
subdivided into units corresponding to the modern divisions, brigades
and regiments, the fighting formation being normally a line of battalion
masses. The arm of the infantry was the 18-foot pike (_sarissa_). The
peltasts, Macedonian and Greek, were numerous and well trained, and
there was the usual mass of irregular light troops, bowmen, slingers,
&c. The cavalry included the Guard ([Greek: agaema]), a body of heavy
cavalry composed of chosen Macedonians, the line cavalry of Macedonia
([Greek: hetairoi]) and Thessaly, the numerous small contingents of the
Greek states, mercenary corps and light lancers for outpost work. The
final blow and the gathering of the fruits of victory were now for the
first time the work of the mounted arm. The solid phalanx was almost
unbreakable in the earlier stages of the battle, but after a long
infantry fight the horsemen had their chance. In former wars they were
too few and too poorly mounted to avail themselves of it, and decisive
victories were in consequence rarely achieved in battles of Greek versus
Greek. Under Epaminondas, and still more under Philip and Alexander, the
cavalry was strong enough for its new work. Battles are now ended by the
shock action of mounted men, and in Alexander's time it is noted as a
novelty that the cavalry carried out the pursuit of a beaten army. There
were further, in Alexander's army, artillerymen with a battering train,
engineers and departmental troops, and also a medical service, an
improvement attributed to Jason of Pherae. The victories of this army,
in close order and in open, over every kind of enemy and on every sort
of terrain, produced the Hellenistic world, and in that achievement the
history of Greek armies closes, for after the return of the greater part
of the Europeans to their homes the armies of Alexander and his
successors, while preserving much of the old form, become more and more
orientalized.

The decisive step was taken in 323, when a picked contingent of
Persians, armed mainly with missile weapons, was drafted into the
phalanx, in which henceforward they formed the middle ranks of each file
of sixteen men. But, like the third rank of Prussian infantry up to
1888, they normally fought as skirmishers in advance, falling into their
place behind the pikes of the Macedonian file-leaders only if required
for the decisive assault. The new method, of course, depended for
success on the steadiness of the thin three-deep line of Macedonians
thus left as the line of battle. Alexander's veterans were indeed to be
trusted, but as time went on, and little by little the war-trained
Greeks left the service, it became less and less safe to array the
Hellenistic army in this shallow and articulated order of battle. The
purely formal organization of the phalanx sixteen deep became thus the
actual tactical formation, and around this solid mass of 16,384 men
gathered the heterogeneous levies of a typical oriental army. Pyrrhus,
king of Epirus, retained far more of the tradition of Alexander's system
than his contemporaries farther east, yet his phalanx, comparatively
light and mobile as it was, achieved victories over the Roman legion
only at the cost of self-destruction. Even elephants quickly became a
necessary adjunct to Hellenistic armies.

8. _Carthage._--The military systems of the Jews present few features of
unusual interest. The expedient of calling out successive contingents
from the different tribes, in order to ensure continuity in military
operations, should, however, be noticed. David and Solomon possessed
numerous permanent troops which served as guards and garrisons; in
principle this organization was identical with that of the Persians, and
that of Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. Particular interest
attaches to the Carthaginian military forces of the 3rd century B.C.
Rarely has any army achieved such renown in the short space of sixty
years (264-202 B.C.). Carthage produced a series of great generals,
culminating in Hannibal, who is marked out, even by the little that is
known of him, as the equal of Napoleon. But Napoleon was supported by a
national army, Hannibal and his predecessors were condemned to work with
armies of mercenaries. For the first time in the world's history war is
a matter with which the civil population has no concern. The merchants
of Carthage fought only in the last extremity; the wars in which their
markets were extended were conducted by non-national forces and directed
by the few Carthaginian citizens who possessed military aptitudes. The
civil authorities displayed towards their instruments a spirit of hatred
for which it is difficult to find a parallel. Unsuccessful leaders were
crucified, the mercenary soldiers were cheated of their pay, and broke
out into a mutiny which shook the empire of Carthage to its foundations.
But the magnetism of a leader's personality infused a corporate military
spirit into these heterogeneous Punic armies, and history has never
witnessed so complete an illustration of the power of pure and unaided
_esprit de corps_ as in the case of Hannibal's army in Italy, which,
composed as it was of Spaniards, Africans, Gauls, Numidians, Italians
and soldiers of fortune of every country, was yet welded by him into
thorough efficiency. The army of Italy was as great in its last fight at
Zama as the army of Spain at Rocroi; its victories of the Trebia,
Trasimene and Cannae were so appalling that, two hundred years later,
the leader to whom these soldiers devoted their lives was still, to a
Roman, the "dire" Hannibal.

In their formal organization the Carthaginian armies resembled the new
Greek model, and indeed they were created in the first instance by
Xanthippus, a Spartan soldier in the service of Carthage, who was called
upon to raise and train an army when the Romans were actually at the
gates of Carthage, and justified his methods in the brilliant victory of
Tunis (255 B.C.). For the solid Macedonian phalanx of 16,000 spears
Xanthippus substituted a line of heavy battalions equal in its aggregate
power of resistance to the older form, and far more flexible. The
triumphs of the cavalry arm in Hannibal's battles far excelled those of
Alexander's horsemen. Hannibal chose his fighting ground whenever
possible with a view to using their full power, first to defeat the
hostile cavalry, then to ride down the shaken infantry masses, and
finally to pursue _au fond_. At Cannae, the greatest disaster ever
suffered by the Romans, the decisive blow and the slaughter were the
work of Hannibal's line cavalry, the relentless pursuit that of his
light horse. But a professional long-service army has always the
greatest difficulty in making good its losses, and in the present case
it was wholly unable to do so. Even Hannibal failed at last before the
sustained efforts of the citizen army of Rome.

9. _Roman Army under the Republic._--The earliest organization of the
Roman army is attributed to Romulus, who formed it on the tribal
principle, each of the three tribes contributing its contingent of horse
and foot. But it was to Servius Tullius that Rome owed, traditionally,
the complete classification of her citizen-soldiers. For the details of
the Roman military system, see ROMAN ARMY. During the earlier period of
Roman history the army was drawn entirely from the first classes of the
population, who served without pay and provided their own arms and
armour. The wealthiest men (_equites_) furnished the cavalry, the
remainder the infantry, while the poorer classes either fought as light
troops or escaped altogether the privilege and burden of military
service. Each "legion" of 3000 heavy foot was at first formed in a solid
phalanx. The introduction of the elastic and handy three-line formation
with intervals (similar in many respects to Alexander's) was brought
about by the Gallic wars, and is attributed to M. Furius Camillus, who
also, during the siege of Veii, introduced the practice of paying the
soldiers, and thus removed the chief obstacle to the employment of the
poorer classes. The new order of battle was fully developed in the
Pyrrhic Wars, and the typical army of the Republic may be taken as
dating from the latter part of the 3rd century B.C. The legionary was
still possessed of a property qualification, but it had become
relatively small. An annual levy was made at Rome to provide for the
campaign of the year. Discipline was severe, and the rewards appealed as
much to the soldier's honour as to his desire of gain. A legion now
consisted of three lines (_Hastati, Principes, Triarii_), each line
composed of men of similar age and experience, and was further
subdivided into thirty "maniples," each of two "centuries." The normal
establishment of 300 cavalry, 3000 heavy and 1200 light infantry was
still maintained, though in practice these figures were often exceeded.
In place of the old light-armed and somewhat inferior _rorarii_, the new
_velites_ performed light infantry duties (211 B.C.), at the same time
retaining their place in the maniples, of which they formed the last
ranks (compare the Macedonian phalanx as reorganized in 323, § 7 above).
The 300 cavalry of the legion were trained for shock action. But the
strength of the Roman army lay in the heavy legionary infantry of
citizens. The thirty maniples of each legion stood in three lines of
battle, but the most notable point of their formation was that each
maniple stood by itself on its own small manoeuvre-area, free to take
ground to front or flank. To the Roman legion was added a legion of
allies, somewhat differently organized and possessing more cavalry, and
the whole force was called a "double legion" or briefly a "legion." A
consul's army consisted nominally of two double legions, but in the
Punic wars military exigencies rather than custom dictated the numbers
of the army, and the two consuls at Cannae (216 B.C.) commanded two
double consular armies, or eight double legions.

10. _Characteristics of the Roman Army._--Such in outline was the Roman
military organization at the time when it was put to the severe test of
the Second Punic War. Its elements were good, its military skill
superior to that of any other army of ancient history, while its
organization was on the whole far better than any that had gone before.
The handy formation of maniples at open order was unique in the ancient
world, and it did not reappear in history up to the advent of Gustavus
Adolphus. In this formation, in which everything was entrusted to the
skill of subordinates and the individual courage of the rank and file,
the Romans met and withstood with success every type of impact, from the
ponderous shock of the Macedonian phalanx and the dangerous rush of
Celtic savages to the charge of elephants. Yet it was no particular
virtue in the actual form employed that carried the Roman arms to so
many victories. There would have been positive danger in thus
articulating the legion had it been composed of any but the most
trustworthy soldiers. To swiftness and precision of manoeuvre they added
a dogged obstinacy over which nothing but overwhelming disaster
prevailed. It is, therefore, not unnatural to ask wherein the system
which produced these soldiers failed, as it did within a century after
the battle of Zama. The greatest defect was the want of a single
military command. The civil magistrates of Rome were _ex officio_
leaders of her armies, and though no Roman officer lacked military
training, the views of a consul or praetor were almost invariably
influenced by the programme of his political party. When, as sometimes
happened, the men under their command sided in the political differences
of their leaders, all real control came to an end. The soldiers of the
Republic hardly ever forgot that they were citizens with voting powers;
they served as a rule only during a campaign; and, while there could be
little question as to their patriotism and stubbornness, they lacked
almost entirely that _esprit de corps_ which is found only amongst the
members of a body having a permanent corporate existence. Thus they had
the vices as well as the virtues of a nation in arms, and they fell
still further short of the ideal because of the dubious and precarious
tenure of their generals' commands. The great officers were usually sent
home at the end of a campaign, to be replaced by their elected
successors, and they showed all the hesitation and fear of
responsibility usually found in a temporary commander. Above all, when
two armies, each under its own consul or praetor, acted together, the
command was either divided or exercised on alternate days.

11. _Roman Empire._--The essential weaknesses of militia forces and the
accidental circumstances of that under consideration led, even in
earlier times, to the adoption of various expedients which for a time
obviated the evils to which allusion has been made. But a change of far
greater importance followed the final exploits of the armies of the old
system. The increasing dominions of the Republic, the spread of wealth
and luxury, the gradual decadence of the old Roman ideas, all tended to
produce an army more suited to the needs of the newer time than the
citizen militia of the 3rd century. Permanent troops were a necessity;
the rich, in their newly acquired dislike of personal effort, ceased to
bear their share in the routine life of the army, and thus the
proletariat began to join the legions with the express intention of
taking to a military career. The actual change from the old _régime_ to
the new was in the main the work of Gaius Marius. The urgent demand for
men at the time of the Teutonic invasions caused the service to be
thrown open to all Roman citizens irrespective of _census_. The new
territories furnished cavalry, better and more numerous than the old
_equites_, and light troops of various kinds to replace the _velites_.
Only the heavy foot remained a purely Italian force, and the spread of
the Roman citizenship gradually abolished the distinction between a
Roman and an allied legion. The higher classes had repeatedly shown
themselves unwilling to serve under plebeians (e.g. Varro and
Flaminius); Marius preferred to have as soldiers men who did not despise
him as an inferior. Under all these influences for good or for evil, the
standing army was developed in the first half of the 1st century B.C.
The tactical changes in the legion indicate its altered character. The
small maniples gave way to heavy "cohorts," ten cohorts forming the
legion; as in the Napoleonic wars, light and handy formations became
denser and more rigid with the progressive decadence in _moral_ of the
rank and file. It is more significant still that in the days of Marius
the annual oath of allegiance taken by the soldier came to be replaced
by a personal vow, taken once and for all, of loyalty to the general.
_Ubi bene, ibi patria_ was an expression of the new spirit of the army,
and Caesar had but to address his men as _quirites_ (civilians) to quell
a mutiny. _Hastati, principes_ and _triarii_ were now merely expressions
in drill and tactics. But perhaps the most important of all these
changes was the growth of regimental spirit and tradition. The legions
were now numbered throughout the army, and the Tenth Legion has remained
a classic instance of a "crack" corps. The _moral_ of the Roman army was
founded no longer on patriotism, but on professional pride and _esprit
de corps_.

With this military system Rome passed through the era of the Civil Wars,
at the end of which Augustus found himself with forty-five legions on
his hands. As soon as possible he carried through a great
reorganization, by which, after ruthlessly rejecting inferior elements,
he obtained a smaller picked force of twenty-five legions, with numerous
auxiliary forces. These were permanently stationed in the frontier
provinces of the Empire, while Italy was garrisoned by the Praetorian
cohorts, and thus was formed a regular long-service army, the strength
of which has been estimated at 300,000 men. But these measures,
temporarily successful, produced in the end an army which not only was
perpetually at variance with the civil populations it was supposed to
protect, but frequently murdered the emperors to whom it had sworn
allegiance when it raised them to the throne. The evil fame of the
Italian cohorts has survived in the phrase "praetorianism" used to imply
a venal military despotism. The citizens gradually ceased to bear arms,
and the practice of self-mutilation became common. The inevitable
_dénouement_ was delayed from time to time by the work of an energetic
prince. But the ever-increasing inefficiency and factiousness of the
legions, and the evanescence of all military spirit in the civil
population, made it easy for the barbarians, when once the frontier was
broken through, to overrun the decadent Empire. The end came when the
Gothic heavy horse annihilated the legions of Valens at Adrianople (A.D.
378).

There was now no resource but to take the barbarians into Roman pay.
Under the name of _foederati_, the Gothic mercenary cavalry played the
most conspicuous part in the succeeding wars of the Empire, and began
the reign of the heavy cavalry arm, which lasted for almost a thousand
years. Even so soon as within six years of the death of Valens twenty
thousand Gothic horse decided a great battle in the emperor's favour.
These men, however, became turbulent and factious, and it was not until
the emperor Leo I. had regenerated the native Roman soldier that the
balance was maintained between the national and the hired warrior. The
work of this emperor and of his successors found eventual expression in
the victories of Belisarius and Narses, in which the Romans, in the new
role of horse-archers, so well combined their efforts with those of the
_foederati_ that neither the heavy cavalry of the Goths nor the phalanx
of Frankish infantry proved to be capable of resisting the imperial
forces. At the battle of Casilinum (553) Roman foot-archers and infantry
bore no small part of the work. It was thus in the Eastern Empire that
the Roman military spirit revived, and the Byzantine army, as evolved
from the system of Justinian, became eventually the sole example of a
fully organized service to be found in medieval history.

12. _The "Dark Ages."_--In western Europe all traces of Roman military
institutions quickly died out, and the conquerors of the new kingdoms
developed fresh systems from the simple tribal levy. The men of the
plains were horsemen, those of marsh and moor were foot, and the four
greater peoples retained these original characteristics long after the
conquest had been completed. In organization the Lombards and Franks,
Visigoths and English scarcely differed. The whole military population
formed the mass of the army, the chiefs and their personal retainers the
_élite_. The Lombards and the Visigoths were naturally cavalry; the
Franks and the English were, equally naturally, infantry, and the armies
of the Merovingian kings differed but little from the English _fyrd_
with which Offa and Penda fought their battles. But in these nations the
use of horses and armour, at first confined to kings and great chiefs,
gradually spread downwards to the ever-growing classes of _thegns,
comites_, &c. Finally, under Charlemagne were developed the general
lines of the military organization which eventually became feudalism.
For his distant wars he required an efficient and mobile army. Hence
successive "capitularies" were issued dealing with matters of
recruiting, organization, discipline and field service work. Very
noticeable are his system of forts (_burgi_) with garrisons, his
military train of artillery and supplies, and the reappearance of the
ancient principle that three or four men should equip and maintain one
of themselves as a warrior. These and other measures taken by him tended
to produce a strong veteran army, very different in efficiency from the
tumultuary levy, to which recourse was had only in the last resort.
While war (as a whole) was not yet an art, fighting (from the
individual's point of view) had certainly become a special function;
after Charlemagne's time the typical feudal army, composed of
well-equipped cavalry and ill-armed peasantry serving on foot, rapidly
developed. Enemies such as Danes and Magyars could only be dealt with by
mounted men who could ride round them, compel them to fight, and
annihilate them by the shock of the charge; consequently the practice of
leaving the infantry in rear, and even at home, grew up almost as a part
of the feudal system of warfare. England, however, sought a different
remedy, and thus diverged from the continental methods. This remedy was
the creation of a fleet, and, the later Danish wars being there carried
out, not by bands of mounted raiders, but by large armies of military
settlers, infantry retained its premier position in England up to the
day of Hastings. Even the _thegns_, who there, as abroad, were the
mainstay of the army, were heavy-armed infantry. The only contribution
made by Canute to the military organization of England was the retention
of a picked force of _hus carles_ (household troops) when the rest of
the army with which he had conquered his realm was sent back to
Scandinavia. At Hastings, the forces of Harold consisted wholly of
infantry. The English array was composed of the king and his personal
friends, the _hus carles_, and the contingents of the _fyrd_ under the
local _thegns_; though better armed, they were organized after the
manner of their forefathers. On that field there perished the best
infantry in Europe, and henceforward for three centuries there was no
serious rival to challenge the predominance of the heavy cavalry.

13. _The Byzantines_ (cf. article ROMAN EMPIRE, LATER).--While the west
of Europe was evolving feudalism, the Byzantine empire was acquiring an
army and military system scarcely surpassed by any of those of antiquity
and not often equalled up to the most modern times. The _foederati_
disappeared after the time of Justinian, and by A.D. 600 the army had
become at once professional and national. For generations, regiments had
had a corporate existence. Now brigades and divisions also appeared in
war, and, somewhat later, in peace likewise. With the disappearance of
the barbarians, the army became one homogeneous service, minutely
systematized, and generally resembling an army in the modern sense of
the word. The militia of the frontier districts performed efficiently
the service of surveillance, and the field forces of disciplined
regulars were moved and employed in accordance with well-reasoned
principles of war; their maintenance was provided for by a scutage,
levied, in lieu of service, on the central provinces of the empire.
Later, a complete territorial system of recruiting and command was
introduced. Each "theme" (military district) had its own regular
garrison, and furnished a field division of some 5000 picked troopers
for a campaign in any theatre of war. Provision having been made in
peace for a depot system, all weakly men and horses could be left
behind, and local duties handed over to second line troops; thus the
field forces were practically always on a war footing. Beside the
"themes" under their generals, there were certain districts on the
frontiers, called "clissuras," placed under chosen officers, and
specially organized for emergency service. The corps of officers in the
Byzantine army was recruited from the highest classes, and there were
many families (e.g. that from which came the celebrated Nicephorus
Phocas) in which soldiering was the traditional career. The rank and
file were either military settlers or men of the yeoman class, and in
either case had a personal interest in the safety of the theme which
prevented friction between soldiers and civilians. The principal arm
was, of course, cavalry, and infantry was employed only in special
duties. Engineer, train and medical services were maintained in each
theme. Of the ensemble of the Byzantine army it has been said that "the
art of war as it was understood at Constantinople ... was the only
system of real merit existing. No western nation could have afforded
such a training to its officers till the 16th or ... 17th century." The
vitality of such an army remained intact long after the rest of the
empire had begun to decay, and though the old army practically ceased to
exist after the great disaster of Manzikert (1071), the barbarians and
other mercenaries who formed the new service were organized, drilled and
trained to the same pitch of military efficiency. Indeed the greatest
tactical triumph of the Byzantine system (Calavryta, 1079) was won by an
army already largely composed of foreigners. But mercenaries in the end
developed praetorianism, as usual, and at last they actually mutinied,
in the presence of the enemy, for higher pay (Constantinople, 1204).

14. _Feudalism._--From the military point of view the change under
feudalism was very remarkable. For the first time in the history of
western Europe there appears, in however rough a form, a systematized
obligation to serve in arms, regulated on a territorial basis. That army
organization in the modern sense--organization for tactics and
command--did not develop in any degree commensurate with the development
of military administration, was due to the peculiar characteristics of
the feudal system, and the virtues and weaknesses of medieval armies
were its natural outcome. Personal bravery, the primary virtue of the
soldier, could not be wanting in the members of a military class, the
_métier_ of which was war and manly exercises. Pride of caste, ambition
and knightly emulation, all helped to raise to a high standard the
individual efficiency of the feudal cavalier. But the gravest faults of
the system, considered as an army organization, were directly due to
this personal element. Indiscipline, impatience of superior control, and
dangerous knight-errantry, together with the absence of any chain of
command, prevented the feudal cavalry from achieving results at all
proportionate to the effort expended and the potentialities of a force
with so many soldierly qualities. If such defects were habitually found
in the best elements of the army--the feudal tenants and subtenants who
formed the heavy cavalry arm--little could be expected of the despised
and ill-armed foot-soldiery of the levy. The swift raids of the Danes
and others (see above) had created a precedent which in French and
German wars was almost invariably followed. The feudal levy rarely
appeared at all on the battlefield, and when it was thus employed it was
ridden down by the hostile knights, and even by those of its own party,
without offering more than the feeblest resistance. Above all, one
disadvantage, common to all classes of feudal soldiers, made an army so
composed quite untrustworthy. The service which a king was able to exact
from his feudatories was so slight (varying from one month to three in
the year) that no military operation which was at all likely to be
prolonged could be undertaken with any hope of success.

15. _Medieval Mercenaries._--It was natural, therefore, that a sovereign
who contemplated a great war should employ mercenaries. These were
usually foreigners, as practically all national forces served on feudal
terms. While the greater lords rode with him on all his expeditions, the
bulk of his army consisted of professional soldiers, paid by the levy of
_scutage_ imposed upon the feudal tenantry. There had always been
soldiers of fortune. William's host at Hastings contained many such men;
later, the Flemings who invaded England in the days of Henry I. sang to
each other--

  "Hop, hop, Willeken, hop! England is mine and thine,"--

and from all the evidence it is clear that in earlier days the hired
soldiers were adventurers seeking lands and homes. But these men usually
proved to be most undesirable subjects, and sovereigns soon began to pay
a money wage for the services of mercenaries properly so called. Such
were the troops which figured in English history under Stephen. Such
troops, moreover, formed the main part of the armies of the early
Plantagenets. They were, as a matter of course, armed and armoured like
the knights, with whom they formed the men-at-arms (_gendarmes_) of the
army. Indeed, in the 11th and 12th centuries, the typical army of France
or the Empire contains a relatively small percentage of "knights,"
evidence of which fact may be found even in so fanciful a romance as
_Aucassin and Nicolete_. It must be noted, however, that not all the
mercenaries were heavy cavalry; the Brabançon pikeman and the Italian
crossbowman (the value of whose weapon was universally recognized) often
formed part of a feudal army.

16. _Infantry in Feudal Times._--These mercenary foot soldiers came as a
rule from districts in which the infantry arm had maintained its ancient
predominance in unbroken continuity. The cities of Flanders and Brabant,
and those of the Lombard plain, had escaped feudal interference with
their methods of fighting, and their burgher militia had developed into
solid bodies of heavy-armed pikemen. These were very different from
those of the feudal levy, and individual knightly bravery usually failed
to make the slightest impression on a band of infantry held together by
the stringent corporate feeling of a trade-gild. The more adventurous of
the young men, like those of the Greek cities, took service abroad and
fought with credit in their customary manner. The reign of the
"Brabançon" as a mercenary was indeed short, but he continued, in his
own country, to fight in the old way, and his successor in the
profession of arms, the Genoese crossbowman, was always highly valued.
In England, moreover, the infantry of the old _fyrd_ was not suffered to
decay into a rabble of half-armed countrymen, and in France a burgher
infantry was established by Louis VI. under the name of the _milice des
communes_, with the idea of creating a counterpoise to the power of the
feudatories. Feudalism, therefore, as a military system, was
short-lived. Its limitations had always necessitated the employment of
mercenaries, and in several places a solid infantry was coming into
existence, which was drawn from the sturdy and self-respecting middle
classes, and in a few generations was to prove itself a worthy opponent
not only to the knight, but to the professional man-at-arms.

17. _The Crusades._--It is an undoubted fact that the long wars of the
Crusades produced, directly, but slight improvement in the feudal armies
of Europe. In the East large bodies of men were successfully kept under
arms for a considerable period, but the application of crusading methods
to European war was altogether impracticable. In the first place, much
of the permanent force of these armies was contributed by the military
orders, which had no place in European political activities. Secondly,
enthusiasm mitigated much of the evil of individualism. In the third
place, there was no custom to limit the period of service, since the
Crusaders had undertaken a definite task and would merely have
stultified their own purpose in leaving the work only half done. There
were, therefore, sharp contrasts between crusading and European armies.
In the latter, systematization was confined to details of recruiting; in
the armies of the Cross, men were from time to time obtained by the
accident of religious fervour, while at the same time continuous service
produced a relatively high system of tactical organization. Different
conditions, therefore, produced different methods, and crusading unity
and discipline could not have been imposed on an ordinary army, which
indeed with its paid auxiliaries was fairly adequate for the somewhat
desultory European wars of that time. The statement that the Crusaders
had a direct influence on the revival of infantry is hardly susceptible
of convincing demonstration, but it is at any rate beyond question that
the social and economic results of the Crusades materially contributed
to the downfall of the feudal knight, and in consequence to a rise in
the relative importance of the middle classes. Further, not only were
the Crusading knights compelled by their own want of numbers to rely on
the good qualities of the foot, but the foot themselves were the
"survivors of the fittest," for the weakly men died before they reached
the Holy Land, and with them there were always knights who had lost
their horses and could not obtain remounts. Moreover, when "simple" and
"gentle" both took the Cross there could be no question of treating
Crusaders as if they were the mere feudal levy. But the little direct
influence of the whole of these wars upon military progress in Europe is
shown clearly enough by the fact that at the very close of the Crusades
a great battle was lost through knight-errantry of the true feudal type
(Mansurah).

18. _The Period of Transition_ (1290-1490).--Besides the infantry
already mentioned, that of Scotland and that of the German cities fought
with credit on many fields. Their arm was the pike, and they were always
formed in solid masses (called in Scotland, _schiltrons_). The basis of
the medieval commune being the suppression of the individual in the
social unit, it was natural that the burgher infantry should fight "in
serried ranks and in better order" than a line of individual knights,
who, moreover, were almost powerless before walled cities. But these
forces lacked offensive power, and it was left for the English archers,
whose importance dates from the latter years of the 13th century, to
show afresh, at Creçy, Poitiers and Agincourt, the value of missile
action. When properly supported by other arms, they proved themselves
capable of meeting both the man-at-arms and the pikeman. The greatest
importance attaches to the evolution of this idea of mutual support and
combination. Once it was realized, war became an art, and armies became
specially organized bodies of troops of different arms. It cannot be
admitted, indeed, as has been claimed, that the 14th century had a
scientific system of tactics, or that the campaign of Poitiers was
arranged by the French "general staff." Nevertheless, during this
century armies were steadily coming to consist of expert soldiers, to
the exclusion of national levies and casual mercenaries. It is true
that, by his system of "indents," Edward III. of England raised national
armies of a professional type, but the English soldier thus enrolled,
when discharged by his own sovereign, naturally sought similar
employment elsewhere. This system produced, moreover, a class of
unemployed soldiers, and these, with others who became adventurers from
choice or necessity, and even with foreign troops, formed the armies
which fought in the Wars of the Roses--armies which differed but
slightly from others of the time. The natural result of these wars was
to implant a hatred of soldiery in the heart of a nation which had
formerly produced the best fighting men in Europe, a hatred which left a
deep imprint on the constitutional and social life of the people. In
France, where Joan of Arc passed like a meteor across the military
firmament, the idea of a national regular army took a practical form in
the middle of the 15th century. Still, the forces thus brought into
existence were not numerous, and the soldier of fortune, in spite of
such experiences of his methods as those of the Wars of the Roses, was
yet to attain the zenith of his career.

19. _The Condottieri._--The immediate result of this confused period of
destruction and reconstruction was the _condottiere_, who becomes
important about 1300. In Italy, where the _condottieri_ chiefly
flourished, they were in demand owing to the want of feudal cavalry, and
the inability of burgher infantry to undertake wars of aggression. The
"free companies" (who served in great numbers in France and Spain as
well as in Italy) were "military societies very much like trade-gilds,"
which (so to speak) were hawked from place to place by their managing
directors, and hired temporarily by princes who needed their services.
Unlike the older hirelings, they were permanently organized, and thus,
with their experience and discipline, became the best troops in
existence. But the carrying on of war "in the spirit of a handicraft"
led to bloodless battles, indecisive campaigns, and other unsatisfactory
results, and the reign of the _condottieri_ proper was over by 1400,
subsequent free companies being raised on a more strictly national
basis. With all their defects, however, they were the pioneers of modern
organization. In the inextricable tangle of old and new methods which
constitutes the military system of the 15th century, it is possible to
discern three marked tendencies. One is the result of a purely military
conception of the now special art of war, and its exposition as an art
by men who devote their whole career to it. The second is the idea of a
national army, resulting from many social, economical and political
causes. The third is the tendency towards minuter organization and
subdivision within the army. Whereas the individual feudatories had
disliked the close supervision of a minor commander, and their army had
in consequence remained always a loosely-knit unit, the men who made war
into an art belonged to small bands or corps, and naturally began their
organization from the lower units. Herein, therefore, was the germ of
the regimental system of the present day.

20. _The Swiss._--The best description of a typical European army at the
opening of the new period of development is that of the French army in
Italy in 1494, written by Paolo Giovio. He notes with surprise that the
various corps of infantry and cavalry are distinct, the usual practice
of the time being to combine one lancer, one archer, one groom, &c.,
into a small unit furnished and commanded by the lancer. There were
Swiss and German infantry, armed with pike and halbert, with a few
"shot," who marched in good order to music. There were the heavy
men-at-arms (_gendarmes_), accompanied as of old by mounted archers,
who, however, now fought independently. There were, further, Gascon
slingers and crossbowmen, who had probably acquired, from contact with
Spain, some of the lightness and dash of their neighbours. The artillery
train was composed of 140 heavy pieces and a great number of lighter
guns; these were then and for many generations thereafter a special arm
outside the military establishments (see ARTILLERY). In all this the
only relic of the days of Creçy is the administrative combination of the
men-at-arms and the horse archers, and even this is no longer practised
in action. The most important element in the army is the heavy infantry
of Swiss and Germans. The Swiss had for a century past gradually
developed into the most formidable troops of the day. The wars of Zizka
(q.v.) in Bohemia (1420) materially assisted in the downfall of the
heavy cavalry; and the victories of the Swiss, beginning with Sempach
(1382), had by 1480 proved that their solid battalions, armed with the
long pike and the halberd, were practically invulnerable to all but
missile and shock action combined. By fortune of war, they never met the
English, who had shown the way to deal with the _schiltron_ as early as
Falkirk. So great was their confidence against ordinary troops, that on
one occasion (1444) they detached 1600 men to engage 50,000. It was
natural that a series of victories such as Granson, Morat and Nancy
should place them in the forefront of the military nations of Europe.
The whole people devoted itself thereupon to professional soldiering,
particularly in the French service, and though their monopoly of
mercenary employment lasted a short time only, they continued to furnish
regiments to the armies of France, Spain and the Pope up to the most
modern times. But their efficiency was thoroughly sapped by the growth
of a mutinous and insubordinate spirit, the memory of which has survived
in the proverb _Point d'argent, point de Suisse_, and inspired
Machiavelli with the hatred of mercenaries which marks every page of his
work on the art of war. One of their devices for extorting money was to
appear at the muster with many more soldiers than had been contracted
for by their employers, who were forced to submit to this form of
blackmail. At last the French, tired of these caprices, inflicted on the
Swiss the crushing defeat of Marignan (q.v.), and their tactical system
received its death-blow from the Spaniards at Pavia (1525).

21. _The Landsknechts._--The modern army owes far more of its
organization and administrative methods to the Landsknechts ("men of the
country," as distinct from foreigners) than to the Swiss. As the latter
were traditionally the friends of France, so these Swabians were the
mainstay of the Imperial armies, though both were mercenaries. The
emperor Maximilian exerted himself to improve the new force, which soon
became the model for military Europe. A corps of Landsknechts was
usually raised by a system resembling that of "indents," commissions
being issued by the sovereign to leaders of repute to enlist men. A
"colour" (_Fähnlein_) numbered usually about 400 men, a corps consisted
of a varying number of colours, some corps having 12,000 men. From these
troops, with their intense pride, _esprit de corps_ and comradeship,
there has come down to modern times much of present-day etiquette,
interior economy and "regimental customs"--in other words, nearly all
that is comprised in the "regimental" system. Amongst the most notable
features of their system were the functions of the provost, who combined
the modern offices of provost-marshal, transport and supply officer, and
canteen manager; the disciplinary code, which admitted the right of the
rank and file to judge offences touching the honour of the regiment; and
the women who, lawfully or unlawfully attached to the soldiers, marched
with the regiment and had a definite place in its corporate life. The
conception of the regiment as the home of the soldier was thus realized
in fact.

22. _The Spanish Army._--The tendencies towards professional soldiering
and towards subdivision had now pronounced themselves. At the same time,
while national armies, as dreamed of by Machiavelli; were not yet in
existence, two at least of the powers were beginning to work towards an
ideal. This ideal was an army which was entirely at the disposal of its
own sovereign, trained to the due professional standard, and organized
in the best way found by experience to be applicable to military needs.
On these bases was formed the old Spanish army which, from Pavia (1525)
to Rocroi (1643), was held by common consent to be the finest service in
existence. Almost immediately after emerging from the period of internal
development, Spain found herself obliged to maintain an army for the
Italian wars. In the first instance this was raised from amongst
veterans of the war of Granada, who enlisted for an indefinite time.
Probably the oldest line regiments in Europe are those descended from
the famous _tercios_, whose formation marks the beginning of military
establishments, just as the Landsknechts were the founders of military
manners and customs. The great captains who led the new army soon
assimilated the best points of the Swiss system, and it was the Spanish
army which evolved the typical combination of pike and musket which
flourished up to 1700. Outside the domain the tactics, it must be
credited with an important contribution to the science of army
organization, in the depot system, whereby the _tercios_ in the field
were continually "fed" and kept up to strength. The social position of
the soldier was that of a gentleman, and the young nobles (who soon came
to prefer the _tercios_ to the cavalry service) thought it no shame,
when their commands were reduced, to "take a pike" in another regiment.
The provost and his gallows were as much in evidence in a Spanish camp
as in one of Landsknechts, but the comradeship and _esprit de corps_ of
a _tercio_ were the admiration of all contemporary soldiers. With all
its good qualities, however, this army was not truly national; men soon
came from all the various nations ruled by the Habsburgs, and the
soldier of fortune found employment in a _tercio_ as readily as
elsewhere. But it was a great gain that corps, as such, were fully
recognized as belonging to the government, however shifting the
_personnel_ might be. Permanence of regimental existence had now been
attained, though the universal acceptance and thorough application of
the principle were still far distant. During the 16th century, the
French regular army (originating in the _compagnies d'ordonnance_ of
1445), which was always in existence, even when the Swiss and
_gendarmes_ were the best part of the field forces, underwent a
considerable development, producing amongst other things the military
terminology of the present day. But the wars of religion effectually
checked all progress in the latter part of the century, and the European
reputation of the French army dates only from the latter part of the
Thirty Years' War.

23. _The Sixteenth Century._--The battle of St Quentin (1557) is usually
taken as the date from which the last type of a purely mercenary _arm_
(as distinct from _corps_) comes into prominence. "Brabançon" or "Swiss"
implied pikemen without further qualification, the new term "Reiter"
similarly implied mercenary cavalry fighting with the pistol. Heavy
cavalry could disperse arquebusiers and musketeers, but it was helpless
against solid masses of pikemen; the Reiters solved the difficulty by
the use of the pistol. They were well armoured and had little to fear
from musket-balls. Arrayed in deep squadrons, therefore, they rode up to
the pikes with impunity, and fired methodically _dans le tas_, each rank
when it had discharged its pistols filing to the rear to reload. These
Reiters were organized in squadrons of variable strength, and recruited
in the same manner as were the Landsknechts. They were much inferior,
however, to the latter in their discipline and general conduct, for
cavalry had many more individual opportunities of plunder than the foot,
and the rapacity and selfishness of the Reiters were consequently in
marked contrast to the good order and mutual helpfulness in the field
and in quarters which characterized the regimental system of the
Landsknechts.

24. _Dutch System._--The most interesting feature of the Dutch system,
which was gradually evolved by the patriots in the long War of
Independence, was its minute attention to detail. In the first years of
the war, William the Silent had to depend, for field operations, on
mutinous and inefficient mercenaries and on raw countrymen who had
nothing but devotion to oppose to the discipline and skill of the best
regular army in the world. Such troops were, from the point of view of
soldiers like Alva, mere _canaille_, and the ludicrous ease with which
their armies were destroyed (as at Jemmingen and Mookerheyde), at the
cost of the lives of perhaps a dozen Spanish veterans, went far to
justify this view. But, fortunately for the Dutch, their fortified towns
were exceedingly numerous, and the individual bravery of
citizen-militia, who were fighting for the lives of every soul within
their walls, baffled time after time all the efforts of Alva's men. In
the open, Spanish officers took incredible liberties with the enemy;
once, at any rate, they marched for hours together along submerged
embankments with hostile vessels firing into them from either side.
Behind walls the Dutch were practically a match for the most furious
valour of the assailants.

The insurgents' first important victory in the open field, that of
Rymenant near Malines (1577), was won by the skill of "Bras de Fer," de
la Noue, a veteran French general, and the stubbornness of the English
contingent of the Dutch army--for England, from 1572 onwards, sent out
an ever-increasing number of volunteers. This battle was soon followed
by the great defeat of Gembloux (1578), and William the Silent was not
destined to see the rise of the Dutch army. Maurice of Nassau was the
real organizer of victory. In the wreck of all feudal and burgher
military institutions, he turned to the old models of Xenophon,
Polybius, Aelian and the rest. Drill, as rigid and as complicated as
that of the Macedonian phalanx, came into vogue, the infantry was
organized more strictly into companies and regiments, the cavalry into
troops or cornets. The _Reiter_ tactics of the pistol were followed by
the latter, the former consisted of pikes, halberts and "shot." This
form was generally followed in central Europe, as usual, without the
spirit, but in Holland it was the greater trustworthiness of the rank
and file that allowed of more flexible formations, and here we no longer
see the foot of an army drawn up, as at Jemmingen, in one solid and
immovable "square." In their own country and with the system best suited
thereto, the Dutch, who moreover acquired greater skill and steadiness
day by day, maintained their ground against all the efforts of a Parma
and a Spinola. Indeed, it is the best tribute to the vitality of the
Spanish system that the inevitable _débâcle_ was so long delayed. The
campaigns of Spinola in Germany demonstrated that the "Dutch" system, as
a system for general use, was at any rate no better than the system over
which it had locally asserted its superiority, and the spirit, and not
the form, of Maurice's practice achieved the ultimate victory of the
Netherlanders. In the Thirty Years' War, the unsuccessful armies of
Mansfeld and many others were modelled on the Dutch system,--the forces
of Spinola, of Tilly and of Wallenstein, on the Spanish. In other words,
these systems as such meant little; the discipline and spirit behind
them, everything. Yet the contribution made by the Dutch system to the
armies of to-day was not small; to Maurice and his comrades we owe,
first the introduction of careful and accurate drill, and secondly the
beginnings of an acknowledged science of war, the groundwork of both
being the theory and practice of antiquity. The present method of
"forming fours" in the British infantry is ultimately derived from
Aelian, just as the first beats of the drums in a march represent the
regimental calls of the Landsknechts, and the depots and the drafts for
the service battalions date from the Italian wars of Spain.

25. _The Thirty Years' War._--Hitherto all armies had been raised or
reduced according to the military and political situation of the moment.
Spain had indeed maintained a relatively high effective in peace, but
elsewhere a few personal guards, small garrisons, and sometimes a small
regular army to serve as a nucleus, constituted the only permanent
forces kept under arms by sovereigns, though, in this era of perpetual
wars, armies were almost always on a war footing. The expense of
maintenance at that time practically forbade any other system than this,
called in German _Werbe-system_, a term for which in English there is no
nearer equivalent than "enlistment" or "levy" system. It is worth
noticing that this very system is identical in principle with that of
the United States at the present day, viz., a small permanent force,
inflated to any required size at the moment of need. The exceptional
conditions of the Dutch army, indeed, secured for its regiments a long
life; yet when danger was finally over, a large portion of the army was
at once reduced. The history of the British army from about 1740 to 1820
is a most striking, if belated, example of the _Werbe-system_ in
practice. But the Thirty Years' War naturally produced an unusual
continuity of service in corps raised about 1620-1630, and fifty years
later the principle of the standing army was universally accepted. It is
thus that the senior regiments of the Prussian and Austrian armies date
from about 1630. At this time an event took place which was destined to
have a profound influence on the military art. Gustavus Adolphus of
Sweden landed in Germany with an army better organized, trained and
equipped than any which had preceded it. This army, by its great victory
of Breitenfeld (1631), inaugurated the era of "modern" warfare, and it
is to the system of Gustavus that the student must turn for the initial
point of the progressive development which has produced the armies of
to-day. Spanish and Dutch methods at once became as obsolete as those of
the Landsknechts.

26. _The Swedish Army._--The Swedish army was raised by a carefully
regulated system of conscription, which was "preached in every pulpit in
Sweden." There were indeed enlisted regiments of the usual type, and it
would seem that Gustavus obtained the best even of the soldiers of
fortune. But the national regiments were raised on the _Indelta_ system.
Each officer and man, under this scheme, received a land grant within
the territorial district of his corps, and each of these districts
supplied recruits in numbers proportionate to its population. This
curious mixture of feudal and modern methods produced the best elements
of an army, which, aided by the tactical and technical improvements
introduced by Gustavus, proved itself incomparably superior to its
rivals. Of course the long and bloody campaigns of 1630-34 led to the
admission of great numbers of mercenaries even into the Swedish corps;
and German, Scottish and other regiments figured largely, not only in
the armies of Duke Bernhard and his successors, but in the army of
Gustavus' own lifetime. As early as 1632 one brigade of the army was
distinguished by the title "Swedish," as alone containing no foreigners.
Yet the framework was much the same as it had been in 1630. The
battle-organization of two lines and two wings, which was typical of the
later "linear" tactics, began to supplant the system of the _tercios_.
How cumbrous the latter had become by 1630 may be judged from any
battle-plan of the period, and notably from that of Lützen. Gustavus'
cavalry fought four or three deep only, and depended as little as
possible on the pistol. The work of riding down the pikes was indeed
rendered easier by the improved tactical handiness of the musketeers,
but it was fiery leading which alone compelled victory, for there were
relatively few Swedish horse and many squadrons of Germans and others,
who in themselves were far less likely to charge boldly than the
"Pappenheimers" and other crack corps of the enemy. The infantry was of
the highest class, and only on that condition could loose and supple
lines be trusted to oppose the solid _tercios_ of Tilly and Wallenstein.
Cumbrous indeed these were, but by long practice they had acquired no
small manoeuvring power, of which Breitenfeld affords a striking
example. The Swedes, however, completely surpassed them. The progress
thus made may be gauged from the fact that under Gustavus the largest
closed body of infantry was less than 300 strong. Briefly, the genius of
a great commander, the ardour of a born cavalry leader, better arms and
better organization, carried the Swedes to the end of their career of
victory, but how personal was the _vis viva_ which inspired the army was
quickly noticeable after the death of Gustavus. Even a Bernhard could,
in the end, evoke no more heroism from a Swedish army than from any
other, and the real Swedish troops fought their last battle at
Nördlingen (1634). After this, little distinguished the "Swedish" forces
from the general mass of the armies of the time, save their system, to
which, and to its influence on the training of such leaders as Banér,
Torstensson and Wrangel, all their later victories were due. So much of
Gustavus' work survived even the carnage of Nördlingen, and his system
always obtained better results, even with the heterogeneous troops of
this later period, than any other of the time.

27. _The English Civil War_ (see GREAT REBELLION).--The armies on either
side which, about the same time, were fighting out the constitutional
quarrel in England were essentially different from all those of the
continent, though their formal organization was similar to that of the
Swedes. The military expression of a national conscience had appeared
rarely indeed in the Thirty Years' War, which was a means of livelihood
for, rather than an assertion of principle by, those who engaged in it.
In England, on the other hand, there were no mercenaries, and the whole
character of the operations was settled by the burning desire of a true
"nation in arms" to decide at once, by the arbitrament of battle, the
vital points at issue. A German critic (Fritz Hoenig) has indicated
Worcester as the prototype of Sedan; at any rate, battles of this kind
invariably resulted in failure when entrusted to a "standing" army of
the 18th century. But the national armies disappeared at the end of the
struggle; after the Restoration, English political aims became, so far
as military activity was concerned, similar in scope and execution to
those of the continent; and the example of Cromwell and the "New Model,"
which might have revolutionized military Europe, passed away without
having any marked influence on the armies of other nations.

28. _Standing Armies._--Nine years after Nördlingen, the old Spanish
army fought its last and most honourable battle at Rocroi. Its
conquerors were the new French troops, whose victory created as great a
sensation as Pavia and Creçy had done. Infusing a new military spirit
into the formal organization of Gustavus' system, the French army was
now to "set the fashion" for a century. France had been the first power
to revive regular forces, and the famous "Picardie" regiment disputed
for precedence even with the old _tercios_. The country had emerged from
the confusion of the past century with the foreign and domestic strength
of a practically absolute central power. The Fronde continued the
military history of the army from the end of the Thirty Years' War; and
when the period of consolidation was finally closed, all was prepared
for the introduction of a "standing army," practically always at war
strength, and entirely at the disposal of the sovereign. The
reorganization of the military establishments by Louvois may be taken as
the formal date at which standing armies came into prominence (see
historical sketch of the French army below). Other powers rapidly
followed the lead of France, for the defects of enlisted troops had
become very clear, and the possession of an army always ready for war
was an obvious advantage in dynastic politics. The French proprietary
system of regiments, and the general scheme of army administration which
replaced it, may be taken as typical of the armies of other great powers
in the time of Louis XIV.

29. _Character of the Standing Armies._--A peculiar character was from
the first imparted to the new organizations by the results of the Thirty
Years' War. A well-founded horror of military barbarity had the effect
of separating the soldier from the civilian by an impassable gulf. The
drain of thirty years on the population, resources and finances of
almost every country in middle Europe, everywhere limited the size of
the new armies; and the decision in 1648 of all questions save those of
dynastic interest dictated the nature of their employment. The best
soldiers of the time pronounced in favour of small field armies, for in
the then state of communications and agriculture large forces proved in
practice too cumbrous for good work. In every country, therefore, the
army took the form of a professional body, nearly though not quite
independent of extra recruits for war, set apart entirely from all
contact with civil life, rigidly restricted as to conduct in peace and
war, and employed mostly in the "maintenance" of their superiors'
private quarrels. Iron discipline produced splendid tenacity in action,
and wholesale desertion at all times. In the Seven Years' War, for
instance, the Austrians stated one-fifth of their total loss as due to
desertion, and Thackeray's _Barry Lyndon_ gives no untrue picture of the
life of a soldier under the old régime. Further, since men were costly,
rigid economy of their lives in action, and minute care for their
feeding and shelter on the march, occupied a disproportionate amount of
the attention of their generals. Armies necessarily moved slowly and
remained concentrated to facilitate supply and to check desertion, and
thus, when a commander had every unit of his troops within a short ride
of his headquarters, there was little need for intermediate general
officers, and still less for a highly trained staff.

30. _Organization in the 18th Century._--All armies were now almost
equal in fighting value, and war was consequently reduced to a set of
rules (not principles), since superiority was only to be gained by
methods, not by men. Soldiers such as Marlborough, who were superior to
these jejune prescriptions, met indeed with uniform success. But the
methods of the 18th century failed to receive full illustration, save by
the accident of a great captain's direction, even amidst the
circumstances for which they were designed. It is hardly to be wondered
at, therefore, that they failed, when forced by a new phase of
development to cope with events completely beyond their element. The
inner organization was not markedly altered. Artillery was still outside
the normal organization of the line of battle, though in the period
1660-1740 much was done in all countries to improve the material, and
above all to turn the _personnel_ into disciplined soldiers. Cavalry was
organized in regiments and squadrons, and armed with sabre and pistol.
Infantry had by 1703 begun to assume its three-deep line formation and
the typical weapons of the arm, musket and bayonet. Regiments and
battalions were the units of combat as well as organization. In the
fight the company was entirely merged in the higher unit, but as an
administrative body it still remained. As for the higher organization,
an army consisted simply of a greater or less number of battalions and
squadrons, without, as a rule, intermediate commands and groupings. The
army was arrayed as a whole in two lines of battle, with the infantry in
the centre and the cavalry on the flanks, and an advanced guard; the
so-called reserve consisting merely of troops not assigned to the
regular commands. It was divided, for command in action, into right and
left wings, both of cavalry and infantry, of each line. This was the
famous "linear" organization, which in theory produced the maximum
effort in the minimum time, but in practice, handled by officers whose
chief care was to avoid the expenditure of effort, achieved only
negative results. To see its defects one need only suppose a battalion
of the first line hard pressed by the enemy. A battalion of the second
line was directly behind it, but there was no authority, less than that
of the wing commander, which could order it up to support the first. All
the conditions of the time were opposed to tactical subdivision, as the
term is now understood. That the 18th century did not revive
_schiltrons_ was due to the new fire tactics, to which everything but
control was sacrificed. This "control," as has been said, implied not so
much command as police supervision. But far beyond any faults of
organization and recruiting, the inherent vice of these armies was, as
Machiavelli had pointed out two centuries previously, and as Prussia was
to learn to her cost in 1806, that once they were thoroughly defeated,
the only thing left to be done was to make peace at once, since there
was no other armed force capable of retrieving a failure.

31. _Frederick the Great._--The military career of Frederick the Great
is very different from those of his predecessors. With an army organized
on the customary system, and trained and equipped, better indeed, but
still on the same lines as those of his rivals, the king of Prussia
achieved results out of all proportion to those imagined by contemporary
soldiers. It is to his campaigns, therefore, that the student must refer
for the real, if usually latent, possibilities of the army of the 18th
century. The prime secret of his success lay in the fact that he was his
own master, and responsible to no superior for the uses to which he put
his men. This position had never, since the introduction of standing
armies, been attained by any one, even Eugene and Leopold of Dessau
being subject to the common restriction; and with this extraordinary
advantage over his opponents, Frederick had further the firmness and
ruthless energy of a great commander. Prussia, moreover, was more
strictly organized than other countries, and there was relatively little
of that opposition of local authorities to the movement of troops which
was conspicuous in Austria. The military successes of Prussia,
therefore, up to 1757, were not primarily due to the system and the
formal tactics, but were the logical outcome of greater energy in the
leading, and less friction in the administration, of her armies. But the
conditions were totally different in 1758-1762, when the full force of
the alliance against Prussia developed itself in four theatres of war.
Frederick was driven back to the old methods of making war, and his men
were no longer the soldiers of Leuthen and Hohenfriedberg. If discipline
was severe before, it was merciless then; the king obtained men by force
and fraud from every part of Germany, and had both to repress and to
train them in the face of the enemy. That under such conditions, and
with such men, the weaker party finally emerged triumphant, was indeed a
startling phenomenon. Yet its result for soldiers was not the production
of the national army, though the dynastic forces had once more shown
themselves incapable of compassing decisive victories, nor yet the
removal of the barrier between army and people, for the operations of
Frederick's recruiting agents made a lasting impression, and, further,
large numbers of men who had thought to make a profession of arms were
turned adrift at the end of the war. On the contrary, all that the great
and prolonged _tour de force_ of these years produced was a tendency,
quite in the spirit of the age, to make a formal science out of the art
of war. Better working and better methods were less sought after than
systematization of the special practices of the most successful
commanders. Thus Frederick's methods, since 1758 essentially the same as
those of others, were taken as the basis of the science now for the
first time called "strategy," the fact that his opponents had also
practised it without success being strangely ignored. Along with this
came a mania for imitation. Prussian drill, uniforms and hair-powder
were slavishly copied by every state, and for the next twenty years, and
especially when the war-trained officers and men had left active
service, the purest pedantry reigned in all the armies of Europe,
including that of Prussia. One of the ablest of Frederick's subordinates
wrote a book in which he urged that the cadence of the infantry step
should be increased by one pace per minute. The only exceptions to the
universal prevalence of this spirit were in the Austrian army, which was
saved from atrophy by its Turkish wars, and in a few British and French
troops who served in the American War of Independence. The British
regiments were sent to die of fever in the West Indies; when the storm
of the French Revolution broke over Europe, the Austrian army was the
only stable element of resistance.

32. _The French Revolution._--Very different were the armies of the
Revolution. Europe, after being given over to professional soldiers for
five hundred years, at last produced the modern system of the "nation in
arms." The French volunteers of 1792 were a force by which the routine
generals of the enemy, working with instruments and by rules designed
for other conditions, were completely puzzled, and France gained a short
respite. The year 1793 witnessed the most remarkable event that is
recorded in the history of armies. Raw enthusiasm was replaced, after
the disasters and defections which marked the beginning of the campaign,
by a systematic and unsparing conscription, and the masses of men thus
enrolled, inspired by ardent patriotism and directed by the ferocious
energy of the Committee of Public Safety, met the disciplined formalists
with an opposition before which the attack completely collapsed. It was
less marvellous in fact than in appearance that this should be so. Not
to mention the influence of pedantry and senility on the course of the
operations, it may be admitted that Frederick and his army at their best
would have been unable to accomplish the downfall of the now thoroughly
roused French. Tactically, the fire of the regulars' line caused the
Revolutionary levies to melt away by thousands, but men were ready to
fill the gaps. No complicated supply system bound the French to
magazines and fortresses, for Europe could once more feed an army
without convoys, and roads were now good and numerous. No fear of
desertion kept them concentrated under canvas, for each man was
personally concerned with the issue. If the allies tried to oppose them
on an equal front, they were weak at all points, and the old
organization had no provision for the working of a scattered army. While
ten victorious campaigns had not carried Marlborough nearer to Paris
than some marches beyond the Sambre, two campaigns now carried a French
army to within a few miles of Vienna. It was obvious that, before such
forces and such mobility, the old system was doomed, and with each
successive failure the old armies became more discouraged. Napoleon's
victories finally closed this chapter of military development, and by
1808 the only army left to represent it was the British. Even to this
the Peninsular War opened a line of progress, which, if different in
many essentials from continental practice, was in any case much more
than a copy of an obsolete model.

33. _The Conscription._--In 1793, at a moment when the danger to France
was so great as to produce the rigorous emergency methods of the Reign
of Terror, the combined enemies of the Republic had less than 300,000
men in the field between Basel and Dunkirk. On the other hand, the call
of the "country in danger" produced more than four times this number of
men for the French armies within a few months. Louis XIV., even when all
France had been awakened to warlike enthusiasm by a similar threat
(1709), had not been able to put in the field more than one-fifth of
this force. The methods of the great war minister Carnot were enforced
by the ruthless committee, and when men's lives were safer before the
bayonets of the allies than before the civil tribunals at home, there
was no difficulty in enlisting the whole military spirit of France.
There is therefore not much to be said as to the earliest application of
the conscription, at least as regards its formal working, since any
system possessing elasticity would equally have served the purpose. In
the meanwhile, the older plans of organization had proved inadequate for
dealing with such imposing masses of men. Even with disciplined soldiers
they had long been known as applicable only to small armies, and the
deficiencies of the French, with their consequences in tactics and
strategy, soon produced the first illustrations of modern methods.
Unable to meet the allies in the plain, they fought in broken ground and
on the widest possible front. This of course produced decentralization
and subdivision; and it became absolutely necessary that each detachment
on a front of battle 30 m. long (e.g. Stokach) should be properly
commanded and self-sufficing. The army was therefore constituted in a
number of _divisions_, each of two or more brigades with cavalry and
artillery sufficient for its own needs. It was even more important that
each divisional general, with his own staff, should be a real commander,
and not merely the supervisor of a section of the line of battle, for he
was almost in the position that a commander-in-chief had formerly held.
The need of generals was easily supplied when there was so wide a field
of selection. For the allies the mere adoption of new forms was without
result, since it was contrary both to tradition and to existing
organization. The attempts which were made in this direction did not
tend to mitigate the evils of inferior numbers and _moral_. The French
soon followed up the divisional system with the further organization of
groups of divisions under specially selected general officers; this
again quickly developed into the modern army corps.

34. _Napoleon._--Revolutionary government, however, gave way in a few
years to more ordinary institutions, and the spirit of French politics
had become that of aggrandizement in the name of liberty. The ruthless
application of the new principle of masses had been terribly costly, and
the disasters of 1799 reawakened in the mass of the people the old
dislike of war and service. Even before this it had been found necessary
to frame a new act, the famous law proposed by General Jourdan (1798).
With this the conscription for general service began. The legal term of
five years was so far exceeded that the service came to be looked upon
as a career, or servitude, for life; it was therefore both unavoidable
and profitable to admit substitutes. Even in 1806 one quarter of
Napoleon's conscripts failed to come up for duty. The _Grande Armée_
thus from its inception contained elements of doubtful value, and only
the tradition of victory and the 50% of veterans still serving aided the
genius of Napoleon to win the brilliant victories of 1805 and 1806. But
these veterans were gradually eliminated by bloodshed and service
exposure, and when, after the peace of Tilsit, "French" armies began to
be recruited from all sorts of nations, decay had set in. As early as
1806 the emperor had had to "anticipate" the conscription, that is, call
up the conscripts before their time, and by 1810 the percentage of
absentees in France had grown to about 80, the remainder being largely
those who lacked courage to oppose the authorities. Finally, the armies
of Napoleon became masses of men of all nations fighting even more
unwillingly than the armies of the old régime. Little success attended
the emperor's attempt to convert a "nation in arms" into a great
dynastic army. Considered as such, it had even fewer elements of
solidity than the standing armies of the 18th century, for it lacked the
discipline which had made the regiments of Frederick invincible. After
1812 it was attacked by huge armies of patriots which possessed
advantages of organization and skilful direction that the _levée en
masse_ of 1793 had lacked. Only the now fully developed genius and
magnificent tenacity of Napoleon staved off for a time the _débâcle_
which was as inevitable as had been that of the old régime.

35. _The Grande Armée._--In 1805-1806, when the older spirit of the
Revolution was already represented by one-half only of French soldiers,
the actual steadiness and manoeuvring power of the _Grande Armée_ had
attained its highest level. The army at this time was organized into
brigades, divisions and corps, the last-named unit being as a rule a
marshal's command, and always completed as a small army with all the
necessary arms and services. Several such corps (usually of unequal
strength) formed the army. The greatest weakness of the organization,
which was in other respects most pliant and adaptable, was the want of
good staff-officers. The emperor had so far cowed his marshals that few
of them could take the slightest individual responsibility, and the
combatant staff-officers remained, as they had been in the 18th century,
either confidential clerks or merely gallopers. No one but a Napoleon
could have managed huge armies upon these terms; in fact the marshals,
from Berthier downwards, generally failed when in independent commands.
Of the three arms, infantry and cavalry regiments were organized in much
the same way as in Frederick's day, though tactical methods were very
different, and discipline far inferior. The greatest advance had taken
place in the artillery service. Field and horse batteries, as organized
and disciplined units, had come into general use during the
Revolutionary wars, and the division, corps and army commanders had
always batteries assigned to their several commands as a permanent and
integral part of the fighting troops. Napoleon himself, and his
brilliant artillery officers Sénarmont and Drouot, brought the arm to
such a pitch of efficiency that it enabled him to win splendid victories
almost by its own action. As a typical organization we may take the III.
corps of Marshal Davout in 1806. This was formed of the following
troops:--

  Cavalry brigade--General Vialannes--three regiments, 1538 men. Corps
  artillery, 12 guns.

  1st Division--General Morand--five infantry regiments in three
  brigades, 12 guns, 10,820 men.

  2nd Division--General Friant--five regiments in three brigades, 8
  guns, 8758 men.

  3rd Division--General Gudin--four regiments in three brigades, 12
  guns, 9077 men.

A comparison of this _ordre de bataille_ with that of a modern army
corps will show that the general idea of corps organization has
undergone but slight modification since the days of Napoleon. More
troops allotted to departmental duties, and additional engineers for the
working of modern scientific aids, are the only new features in the
formal organization of a corps in the 20th century. Yet the spirit of
1806 and that of 1906 were essentially different, and the story of the
development of this difference through the 19th century closes for the
present the history of progress in tactical organization.

36. _The Wars of Liberation._--The Prussian defeat at Jena was followed
by a national surrender so abject as to prove conclusively the eternal
truth, that a divorce of armies from national interests is completely
fatal to national well-being. But the oppression of the victors soon
began to produce a spirit of ardent patriotism which, carefully directed
by a small band of able soldiers, led in the end to a national uprising
of a steadier and more lasting kind than that of the French Revolution.
Prussia was compelled, by the rigorous treaty of peace, to keep a small
force only under arms, and circumstances thus drove her into the path of
military development which she subsequently followed. The stipulation of
the treaty was evaded by the _Krümper_ system, by which men were passed
through the ranks as hastily as possible and dismissed to the reserve,
their places being taken by recruits. The regimental establishments were
therefore mere _cadres_, and the _personnel_, recruited by universal
service with few exemptions, ever-changing. This system depended on the
willingness of the reserves to come up when called upon, and the
arrogance of the French was quite sufficient to ensure this. The
_dénouement_ of the Napoleonic wars came too swiftly for the full
development of the armed strength of Prussia on these lines; and at the
outbreak of the Wars of Liberation a newly formed _Landwehr_ and
numerous volunteer corps took the field with no more training than the
French had had in 1793. Still, the principles of universal service
(_allgemeine Wehrpflicht_) and of the army reserve were, for the first
time in modern history, systematically put into action, and modern
military development has concerned itself more with the consolidation of
the _Krümper_ system than with the creation of another. The début of the
new Prussian army was most unsuccessful, for Napoleon had now attained
the highest point of soldierly skill, and managed to inflict heavy
defeats on the allies. But the Prussians were not discouraged; like the
French in 1793 they took to broken ground, and managed to win combats
against all leaders opposed to them except Napoleon himself. The Russian
army formed a solid background for the Prussians, and in the end Austria
joined the coalition. Reconstituted on modern lines, the Austrian army
in 1813, except in the higher leading, was probably the best-organized
on the continent. After three desperate campaigns the Napoleonic régime
came to an end, and men felt that there would be no such struggle again
in their lifetime. Military Europe settled down into grooves along which
it ran until 1866. France, exhausted of its manhood, sought a field for
military activities in colonial wars waged by long-service troops. The
conscription was still in force, but the citizens served most
unwillingly, and substitution produced a professional army, which as
usual became a dynastic tool. Austria, always menaced with foreign war
and internal disorder, maintained the best army in Europe. The British
army, though employed far differently, retained substantially the
Peninsular system.

37. _European Armies 1815-1870._--The events of the period 1815-1859
showed afresh that such long-service armies were incomparably the best
form of military machine for the purpose of giving expression to a
hostile "view" (not "feeling"). Austrian armies triumphed in Italy,
French armies in Spain, Belgium, Algeria, Italy and Russia, British in
innumerable and exacting colonial wars. Only the Prussian forces
retained the characteristics of the levies of 1813, and the enthusiasm
which had carried these through Leipzig and the other great battles was
hardly to be expected of their sons, ranged on the side of despotism in
the troubled times of 1848-1850. But the principle was not permitted to
die out. The Bronnzell-Olmütz incident of 1850 (see SEVEN WEEKS' WAR)
showed that the organization of 1813 was defective, and this was altered
in spite of the fiercest opposition of all classes. Soon afterwards, and
before the new Prussian army proved itself on a great battlefield, the
American Civil War, a fiercer struggle than any of those which followed
it in Europe, illustrated the capabilities and the weaknesses of
voluntary-service troops. Here the hostile "view" was replaced by a
hostile "feeling," and the battles of the disciplined enthusiasts on
either side were of a very different kind from those of contemporary
Europe. But, if the experiences of 1861-1865 proved that armies
voluntarily enlisted "for the war" were capable of unexcelled feats of
endurance, they proved further that such armies, whose discipline and
training in peace were relatively little, or indeed wholly absent, were
incapable of forcing a swift decision. The European "nation in arms,"
whatever its other failings, certainly achieved its task, or failed
decisively to do so, in the shortest possible time. Only the special
characteristics of the American theatre of war gave the Union and
Confederate volunteers the space and time necessary for the creation of
armies, and so the great struggle in North America passed without
affecting seriously the war ideas and preparations of Europe. The
weakness of the staff work with which both sides were credited helped
further to confirm the belief of the Prussians in their system, and in
this instance they were justified by the immense superiority of their
own general staff to that of any army in existence. It was in this
particular that a corps of 1870 differed so essentially from a corps of
Napoleon's time. The formal organization had not been altered save as
the varying relative importance of the separate arms had dictated. The
almost intangible spirit which animates the members of a general staff,
causes them not merely to "think"--that was always in the
quartermaster-general's department--but to "think alike," so that a few
simple orders called "directives" sufficed to set armies in motion with
a definite purpose before them, whereas formerly elaborate and detailed
plans of battle had to be devised and distributed in order to achieve
the object in view. A comparison of the number of orders and letters
written by a marshal and by his chief of staff in Napoleon's time with
similar documents in 1870 indicates clearly the changed position of the
staff. In the _Grande Armée_ and in the French army of 1870 the officers
of the general staff were often absent entirely from the scene of
action. In Prussia the new staff system produced a far different
result--indeed, the staff, rather than the Prussian military system, was
the actual victor of 1870. Still, the system would probably have
conquered in the end in any case, and other nations, convinced by events
that their departure from the ideal of 1813, however convenient
formerly, was no longer justified, promptly copied Prussia as exactly,
and, as a matter of fact, as slavishly, as they had done after the Seven
Years' War.

38. _Modern Developments._--Since 1870, then, with the single exception
of Great Britain, all the major European powers have adopted the
principle of compulsory short service with reserves. Along with this has
come the fullest development of the territorial system (see below). The
natural consequence therefore of the heavy work falling upon the
shoulders of the Prussian officer, who had to instruct his men, was, in
the first place, a general staff of the highest class, and in the
second, a system of distributing the troops over the whole country in
such a way that the regiments were permanently stationed in the district
in which they recruited and from which they drew their reserves. Prussia
realized that if the reservists were to be obtained when required the
unit must be strictly localized; France, on the contrary, lost much time
and spent much trouble, in the mobilization of 1870, in forwarding the
reservists to a regiment distant, perhaps, 300 m. The Prussian system
did not work satisfactorily at first, for until all the district
staff-officers were trained in the same way there was great inequality
in the efficiency of the various army corps, and central control, before
the modern development of railways, was relatively slight. Further, the
mobilization must be completed, or nearly so, before concentration
begins, and thus an active professional army, always at war strength,
might annihilate the frontier corps before those in the interior were
ready to move. But the advantages far outweighed the defects of the
system, and, such professional armies having after 1870 disappeared,
there was little to fear. Everywhere, therefore, save in Great Britain
(for at that time the United States was hardly counted as a great
military power, in spite of its two million war-trained veterans in
civil life), the German model was followed, and is now followed, with
but slight divergence. The period of reforms after the Prussian model
(about 1873-1890) practically established the military systems which are
treated below as those of the present day. The last quarter of the
century witnessed a very great development of military forces, without
important organic changes. The chief interest to the student of this
period lies in the severe competition between the great military powers
for predominance in numbers, expressed usually in the reduction of the
period of service with the colours to a minimum. The final results of
this cannot well be predicted: it is enough to say that it is the
_Leitmotiv_ in the present stage in the development of armies. Below
will be found short historical sketches of various armies of the present
day which are of interest in respect of their historical development.
Details of existing forces are given in articles dealing with the
several states to which they belong. Historical accounts of the armies
of Japan and of Egypt will be found in the articles on those states. The
Japanese wars of 1894-95 and 1904-5 contributed little to the history of
military organization as a pure science. The true lessons of this war
were the demonstration of the wide applicability of the German methods,
upon which exclusively the Japanese army had formed itself, and still
more the first illustration of the new moral force of nationalities as
the decisive factor. The form of armies remained unaltered. Neither the
events of the Boer War of 1899-1902 nor the Manchurian operations were
held by European soldiers to warrant any serious modifications in
organization. It is to the moral force alluded to above, rather than to
mere technical improvements, that the best soldiers of Europe, and
notably those of the French general staff (see the works of General H.
Bonnal), have of late years devoted their most earnest attention.

PRESENT-DAY ARMIES

39. The main principles of all military organization as developed in
history would seem to be national recruiting and allegiance, distinctive
methods of training and administration, continuity of service and
general homogeneity of form. The method of raising men is of course
different in different states. In this regard armies may conveniently be
classed as voluntarily enlisted, levied or conscript, and militia,
represented respectively by the forces of Great Britain, Germany and
Switzerland. It must not be forgotten, however, that voluntary troops
may be and are maintained even in states in which the bulk of the army
is levied by compulsion, and the simple militia obligation of defending
the country is universally recognized.

40. _Compulsory Service._--Universal liability to service (_allgemeine
Wehrpflicht_) draws into the active army all, or nearly all, the men of
military age for a continuous period of short service, after which they
pass successively to the reserve, the second and the third line troops
(_Landwehr, Landsturm_, &c.). In this way the greatest number of
soldiers is obtained at the cheapest rate and the number of trained men
in reserve available to keep the army up to strength is in theory that
of the able-bodied manhood of the country. In practice the annual levy
is, however, not exhaustive, and increased numerical strength is
obtained by reducing the term of colour-service to a minimum. This may
be less in a hard-worked conscript army than in one which depends upon
the attractions of the service to induce recruits to join. In conscript
armies, training for war is carried out with undeviating rigour. In
these circumstances the recruits are too numerous and the time available
is too limited for the work of training to be committed to a few
selected instructors, and every officer has therefore to instruct his
own men. The result is usually a corps of officers whose capacity is
beyond question, while the general staff is composed of men whose
ability is above a high general average. As to the rank and file, the
men taken for service are in many respects the best of the nation, and
this superiority is progressively enhanced, since increase of population
is not often accompanied by a corresponding increase in the military
establishments. In Germany in 1905, it is stated, nearly half the
contingent was excused from serving in peace time, over and above the
usual numbers exempted or medically rejected. The financial aspect of
compulsory service may be summed up in a few words. The state does not
offer a wage, the pay of the soldier is a mere trifle, and, for a given
expenditure, at least three times as many men may be kept under arms as
under any known "voluntary" system. Above all, the state has at its
disposal for war an almost inexhaustible supply of trained soldiers.
This aspect of compulsory service has indeed led its admirers sometimes
to sacrifice quality to quantity; but, provided always that the regular
training is adequate, it may be admitted that there is no limit to the
numbers which are susceptible of useful employment. There are, however,
many grave defects inherent in all armies raised by compulsory levy (see
CONSCRIPTION, for a discussion of the chief economical and social
questions involved). Most of the advantages of universal service result,
not from the compulsory enlistment, but from the principle of short
service and reserves. But the cost of maintaining huge armies of the
modern European type on the voluntary system would be entirely
prohibitive, and those nations which have adopted the _allgemeine
Wehrpflicht_ have done so with full cognizance of the evil as well as of
the good points of the system.

The chief of these evils is the doubtful element which exists in all
such armies. Under the merciless discipline of the old regime the most
unwilling men feared their officers more than the enemy. Modern short
service, however, demands the good-will of all ranks and may fail
altogether to make recalcitrants into good soldiers, and it may be taken
for granted that every conscript army contains many men who cannot be
induced to fight. Herein lies the justification of the principle of
"masses," and of reduced colour-service; by drawing into the ranks the
maximum number of men, the government has an eventual residuum of the
bravest men in the nation left in the ranks. What has been said of the
officers of these armies cannot be applied to the non-commissioned
officers. Their promotion is necessarily rapid, and the field of
selection is restricted to those men who are willing to re-engage, i.e.
to serve beyond their compulsory term of two or three years. Many men do
so to avoid the struggles of civil life, and such "fugitive and
cloistered virtue" scarcely fosters the moral strength required for
command. As the best men return to civil life, there is no choice but to
promote inferior men, and the latter, when invested with authority, not
infrequently abuse it. Indeed in some armies the soldier regards his
officer chiefly as his protector from the rapacity or cruelty of his
sergeant or corporal. A true short-service army is almost incapable of
being employed on peace service abroad; quite apart from other
considerations, the cost of conveying to and from home annually
one-third or one-half of the troops would be prohibitive. If, as must be
the case, a professional force is maintained for oversea service many
men would join it who would otherwise be serving as non-commissioned
officers at home and the prevailing difficulty would thus be enhanced.
When colonial defence calls for relatively large numbers of men, i.e. an
army, home resources are severely strained.

41. _Conscription_ in the proper sense, i.e. selection by lot of a
proportion of the able-bodied manhood of a country, is now rarely
practised. The obvious unfairness of selection by lot has always had the
result of admitting substitutes procured by those on whom the lot has
fallen; hence the poorer classes are unduly burdened with the defence of
the country, while the rich escape with a money payment. In practice,
conscription invariably produces a professional long-service army in
which each soldier is paid to discharge the obligations of several
successive conscripts. Such an army is therefore a voluntary
long-service army in the main, _plus_ a proportion of the unwilling men
found in every forced levy. The gravest disadvantage is, however, the
fact that the bulk of the nation has not been through the regular army
at all; it is almost impossible to maintain a large and costly standing
army and at the same time to give a full training to auxiliary forces.
The difference between a "national guard" such as that of the siege of
Paris in 1870-71 and a _Landwehr_ produced under the German system, was
very wide. Regarded as a compromise between universal and voluntary
service, conscription still maintains a precarious existence in Europe.
As the cardinal principle of recruiting armies, it is completely
obsolete.

42. _Voluntary Service._--Existing voluntary armies have usually
developed from armies of the old régime, and seem to owe their continued
existence either to the fact that only comparatively small armaments are
maintained in peace, other and larger armies being specially recruited
during a war (a modification of the "enlistment system"), or to the
necessities of garrisoning colonial empires. The military advantages and
disadvantages of voluntary service are naturally the faults and merits
of the opposite system. The voluntary army is available for general
service. It includes few unwilling soldiers, and its resultant advantage
over an army of the ordinary type has been stated to be as high as 30%.
At all events, we need only examine military history to find that with
conscript armies wholesale shirking is far from unknown. That loss from
this cause does not paralyse operations as it paralysed those of the
18th century, is due to the fact that such fugitives do not desert to
the enemy, but reappear in the ranks of their own side; it must not
therefore be assumed that men have become braver because the "missing"
are not so numerous. In colonial and savage warfare the superior
personal qualities of the voluntary soldier often count for more than
skill on the part of the officers. These would be diminished by
shortening the time of service, and this fact, with the expense of
transport, entails that a reasonably long period must be spent with the
colours. On the other hand, the provision of the large armies of modern
warfare requires the maintenance of a reserve, and no reserve is
possible if the whole period for which men will enlist is spent with the
colours. The demand for long service in the individual, and for trained
men in the aggregate, thus produces a compromise. The principle of long
service, i.e. ten years or more with the colours, is not applicable to
the needs of the modern _grande guerre_; it gives neither great initial
strength nor great reserves. The force thus produced is costly and not
lightly to be risked; it affords relatively little opportunity for the
training of officers, and tends to become a class apart from the rest of
the population. On the other hand, such a force is the best possible
army for foreign and colonial service. A state therefore which relies on
voluntary enlistment for its forces at home and abroad, must either keep
an army which is adaptable to both functions or maintain a separate
service for each.

In a state where relatively small armaments are maintained in peace,
voluntary armies are infinitely superior to any that could be obtained
under any system of compulsion. The state can afford to give a good
wage, and can therefore choose its recruits carefully. It can thus have
either a few incomparable veteran soldiers (long-service), or a fairly
large number of men of superior physique and intelligence, who have
received an adequate short-service training. Even the youngest of such
men are capable of good service, while the veterans are probably better
soldiers than any to be found in conscript armies. This is, however, a
special case. The raw material of any but a small voluntary army usually
tends to be drawn from inferior sources; the cost of a larger force,
paid the full wages of skilled labourers, would be very great, and
numbers commensurate with those of an army of the other model could only
be obtained at an exorbitant price. The short-service principle is
therefore accepted. Here, however, as recruiting depends upon the
good-will of the people, it is impossible to work the soldiers with any
degree of rigour. Hence the voluntary soldier must serve longer than a
conscript in order to attain the same proficiency. The reserve is thus
weakened, and the total trained regular force diminished. Moreover, as
fewer recruits are required annually, there is less work for the
officers to do. In the particular case of Great Britain it is
practically certain that in future, reliance will be placed upon the
auxiliary forces and the civil population for the provision of the
enormous reserves required in a great war; this course is, however, only
feasible in the case of an insular nation which has time to collect its
strength for the final and decisive blow overseas. The application of
the same principle to a continental military power depends on the
capacity for stern and unflagging resistance displayed by the _corps de
couverture_ charged with the duty of gaining the time necessary for the
development and concentration of the national masses. In Great Britain
(except in the case of a surprise invasion) the place of this corps
would be taken by "command of the sea." Abroad, the spirit of the
exposed regiments themselves furnishes the only guarantee, and this can
hardly be calculated with sufficient certainty, under modern conditions,
to justify the adoption of this new "enlistment system." Voluntary
service, therefore, with all its intrinsic merits, is only applicable to
the conditions of a great war when the war reserve can be trained _ad
hoc_.

43. The militia idea (see MILITIA) has been applied most completely in
Switzerland, which has no regular army, but trains almost the whole
nation as a militia. The system, with many serious disadvantages, has
the great merit that the maximum number of men receives a certain amount
of training at a minimum cost both to the state and to the individual.
Mention should also be made of the system of augmenting the national
forces by recruiting "foreign legions." This is, of course, a relic of
the _Werbe-system_; it was practised habitually by the British
governments of the 18th and early 19th centuries. "Hessians" figured
conspicuously in the British armies in the American War of Independence,
and the "King's German Legion" was only the best and most famous of many
foreign corps in the service of George III. during the Revolutionary and
Napoleonic wars. A new German Legion was raised during the Crimean War,
but the almost universal adoption of the _Krümper_ system has naturally
put an end to the old method, for all the best recruits are now
accounted for in the service of their own countries.

ARMY ORGANIZATION

44. _Arms of the Service._--Organization into "arms" is produced by the
multiplicity of the weapons used, their functions and their limitations.
The "three arms"--a term universally applied to infantry (q.v.), cavalry
(q.v.) and artillery (q.v.)--coexist owing to the fact that each can
undertake functions which the others cannot properly fulfil. Thus
cavalry can close with an enemy at the quickest pace, infantry can work
in difficult ground, and artillery is effective at great ranges.
Infantry indeed, having the power of engaging both at close quarters and
at a distance, constitutes the chief part of a fighting force. Other
"arms," such as mounted infantry, cyclists, engineers, &c., are again
differentiated from the three chief arms by their proper functions. In
deciding upon the establishment in peace, or the composition of a force
for war, it is therefore necessary to settle beforehand the relative
importance of these functions in carrying out the work in hand. Thus an
army operating in Essex would be unusually strong in infantry, one on
Salisbury Plain would possess a great number of guns, and an army
operating on the South African veldt would consist very largely of
mounted men. The normal European war has, however, naturally been taken
as the basis upon which the relative proportions of the three arms are
calculated. At the battle of Kolin (1757) the cavalry was more than half
as strong as the infantry engaged. At Borodino (1812) there were 39
cavalry to 100 of other arms, and 5 guns per 1000 men. In 1870 the
Germans had at the outset 7 cavalrymen to every 100 men of other arms,
the French 10. As for guns, the German artillery had 3, the French 3½
per 1000 men. In more modern times the proportions have undergone some
alteration, the artillery having been increased, and the cavalry brought
nearer to the Napoleonic standard. Thus the relative proportions, in
peace time, now stand at 5 or 6 guns per 1000 men, and 16 cavalry
soldiers to 100 men of other arms. It must be borne in mind that cavalry
and artillery are maintained in peace at a higher effective than
infantry, the strength of the latter being much inflated in war, while
cavalry and artillery are not easily extemporized. Thus in the
Manchurian campaign these proportions were very different. The Russian
army on the eve of the battle of Mukden (20th of February 1905)
consisted of 370 battalions, 142 squadrons and 153 field batteries (1200
guns), with, in addition, over 200 heavy guns. The strength of this
force, which was organized in three armies, was about 300,000 infantry
and 18,000 cavalry and Cossacks, with 3½ guns per 1000 men of other
arms. The Japanese armies consisted of 300,000 infantry, 11,000 cavalry,
900 field and 170 heavy guns, the proportion of field artillery being 2½
guns per 1000 men.

It is perhaps not superfluous to mention that all the smaller units in a
modern army consist of one arm only. Formerly several dissimilar weapons
were combined in the same unit. The knight with his four or five
variously armed retainers constituted an example of this method of
organization, which slowly died out as weapons became more uniform and
their functions better defined.

45. _Command._--The first essential of a good organization is to ensure
that each member of the organized body, in his own sphere of action,
should contribute his share to the achievement of the common object.
Further, it is entirely beyond the power of one man, or of a few, to
control every action and provide for every want of a great number of
individuals. The modern system of command, therefore, provides for a
system of grades, in which, theoretically, officers of each grade
control a group of the next lower units. A lieutenant-colonel, for
instance, may be in charge of a group of eight companies, each of which
is under a captain. In practice, all armies are permanently organized on
these lines, up to the colonel's or lieutenant-colonel's command, and
most of them are permanently divided into various higher units under
general officers, the brigade, division and army corps. The almost
invariable practice is to organize _infantry_ into companies, battalions
and regiments. _Cavalry_ is divided into troops, squadrons and
regiments. _Artillery_ is organized in batteries, these being usually
grouped in various ways. The other arms and departments are subdivided
in the same general way. The commands of general officers are the
_brigade_ of infantry, cavalry, and in some cases artillery, the
_division_ of two or more infantry brigades and a force of artillery and
mounted troops, or of cavalry and horse artillery, and the _army corps_
of two or more divisions and "corps troops." _Armies_ of several corps,
and _groups of armies_ are also formed.

46. A _brigade_ is the command of a brigadier or major-general, or of a
colonel. It consists almost invariably of one arm only. In armies of the
old régime it was not usual to assign troops of all arms to the
subordinate generals. Hence the brigade is a much older form of
organization than the division of all arms, and in fact dates from the
16th century. The infantry brigade consists, in the British service, of
the brigadier and his staff, four battalions of infantry, and
administrative and medical units, the combatant strength being about
4000 men. In Germany and France the brigade is composed of the staff,
and two regiments (6 battalions) with a total of over 6000 combatants at
war strength. The cavalry brigade is sometimes formed of three,
sometimes of two regiments; the number of squadrons to a regiment on
service is usually four, exceptionally three, and rarely five and six.
The "brigade" of artillery in Great Britain is a lieutenant-colonel's
command, and the term here corresponds to the _Abtheilung_ of the
German, and the _groupe_ of the French armies (see ARTILLERY). In
Germany and France, however, an artillery brigade consists of two or
more regiments, or twelve batteries at least, under the command of an
artillery general officer.

47. A _division_ is an organization containing troops of all arms. Since
the virtual abolition of the "corps artillery" (see ARTILLERY), the
force of field artillery forming part of an infantry division is
sometimes as high as 72 guns (Germany); in Great Britain the augmented
division of 1906 has 54 field guns, 12 field howitzers, and 4 heavy
guns, a total of 70. The term "infantry" division is, in strictness, no
longer applicable, since such a unit is a miniature army corps of
infantry, artillery and cavalry, with the necessary services for the
supply of ammunition, food and forage, and for the care of the sick and
wounded. A more exact title would be "army" division. In general it is
composed, so far as combatants are concerned, of the divisional
commander and his staff, two or more infantry brigades, a number of
batteries of field artillery forming a regiment, brigade or group, a
small force, varying from a squadron to a regiment, of cavalry
(divisional cavalry), with some engineers. The force of the old British
division (1905) may be taken, on an average, as 10,000 men, increased in
the 1906 reorganization to about 15,000 combatants. In other armies the
fighting force of the division amounts to rather more than 14,000. The
_cavalry division_ (see CAVALRY) is composed of the staff, two or three
cavalry brigades, horse artillery, with perhaps mounted infantry,
cyclists, or even light infantry in addition. In many, if not most,
armies cavalry divisions are formed only in war. In the field the
cavalry division is usually an independent unit with its own commander
and staff. "Cavalry corps" of several divisions have very rarely been
formed in the past, a division having been regarded as the largest unit
capable of being led by one man. There is, however, a growing tendency
in favour of the corps organization, at any rate in war.

48. _Army Corps._--The "corps" of the 18th century was simply a large
detachment, more or less complete in itself, organized for some
particular purpose (e.g. to cover a siege), and placed for the time
being under some general officer other than the chief commander. The
modern army corps is a development from the division of all arms, which
originated in the French Revolutionary wars. It is a unit of
considerable strength, furnished with the due proportion of troops of
all arms and of the auxiliary and medical services, and permanently
placed under the command of one general. The corps organization (though
a _corps d'armée_ was often spoken of as an _armée_) was used in
Napoleon's army in all the campaigns of the Empire. It may be mentioned,
as a curious feature of Napoleon's methods, that he invariably
constituted each _corps d'armée_ of a different strength, so that the
enemy would not be able to estimate his force by the simple process of
counting the corps flags which marked the marshals' headquarters. Thus
in 1812 he constituted one corps of 72,000 men, while another had but
18,000. After the fall of Napoleon a further advance was made. The
adoption of universal service amongst the great military nations brought
in its train the territorial organization, and the corps, representing a
large district, soon became a unit of peace formation. For the smooth
working of the new military system it was essential that the framework
of the war army should exist in peace. The Prussians were the first to
bring the system to perfection; long before 1866 Prussia was permanently
divided into army corps districts, all the troops of the III. army corps
being Brandenburgers, all those of the VI. Silesians, and so on, though
political reasons required, and to some extent still require,
modifications of this principle in dealing with annexed territory (e.g.
Hanover and Alsace-Lorraine). The events of 1866 and of 1870-71 caused
the almost universal adoption of the army corps regional system. In the
case of the British army, operating as it usually did in minor wars, and
rarely having more than sixty or seventy thousand men on one theatre
even in continental wars, there was less need of so large a unit as the
corps. Not only was a British army small in numbers, but it preserved
high traditions of discipline, and was sufficiently well trained to be
susceptible as a unit to the impulse given by one man. Even where the
term "corps" does appear in Peninsular annals, the implication is of a
corps in the old sense of a grand detachment. Neither cavalry nor
artillery was assigned to any of the British "corps" at Waterloo.

49. _Constitution of the Army Corps._--In 1870-71 the III. German army
corps (with which compare Marshal Davout's _ordre de bataille_ above)
consisted of the following combatant units: (a) staff; (b) two infantry
divisions (4 brigades. 8 regiments or 24 battalions), with, in each
division, a cavalry regiment, 4 batteries of artillery or 24 guns, and
engineers; (c) corps troops, artillery (6 field batteries), pioneer
battalion (engineers), train battalion (supply and transport). A rifle
battalion was attached to one of the divisions.

This _ordre de bataille_ was followed more or less generally by all
countries up to the most modern times, but between 1890 and 1902 came a
very considerable change in the point of view from which the corps was
regarded as a fighting unit. This change was expressed in the abolition
of the corps artillery. Formerly the corps commander controlled the
greater part of the field artillery, as well as troops of other arms; at
the present time he has a mere handful of troops. Unless battalions are
taken from the divisions to form a corps reserve, the direct influence
of the corps organization on the battle is due almost solely to the fact
that the commander has at his disposal the special natures of artillery
and also some horse artillery. Thus the (augmented) division is regarded
by many as the fighting unit of the 20th, as the corps was that of the
19th century. In Europe there is even a tendency to substitute the
ancient phrase "reserve artillery" for "corps artillery," showing that
the role to be played by the corps batteries is subordinated to the
operations of the masses of divisional artillery, the whole being
subject, of course, to the technical supervision of the artillery
general officer who accompanies the corps headquarters. Thus limited,
the army corps has now come to consist of the staff, two or more
divisions, the corps or reserve artillery (of special batteries), a
small force of "corps" cavalry, and various technical and departmental
troops. The cavalry is never very numerous, owing to the demands of the
independent cavalry divisions on the one hand and those of the
divisional cavalry on the other. The engineers of an army corps include
telegraph, balloon and pontoon units. Attached to the corps are reserves
of munitions and supplies in ammunition columns, field parks, supply
parks, &c. The term and the organization were discontinued in England in
1906, on the augmentation of the divisions and the assignment of certain
former "corps troops" to the direct control of the army commanders. It
should be noticed that the Japanese, who had no corps organization
during the war of 1904-5, afterwards increased the strength of their
divisions from 15,000 to 20,000; the augmented "division," with the
above _peace_ strength, becomes to all intents and purposes a corps, and
the generals commanding divisions were in 1906 given the title of
generals-in-chief.

50. _Army._--The term "army" is applied, in war time, to any command of
several army corps, or even of several divisions, operating under the
orders of one commander-in-chief. The army in this sense (distinguished
by a number or by a special title) varies, therefore, with
circumstances. In the American Civil War, the Army of the Ohio consisted
in 1864 only of the army staff and the XXIII. corps. At the other
extreme we find that the German II. Army in 1870 consisted of seven army
corps and two cavalry divisions, and the III. Army of six army corps and
two cavalry divisions. The term "army" in this sense is therefore very
elastic in its application, but it is generally held that large groups
of corps operating in one theatre of war should be subdivided into
armies, and that the strength of an army should not exceed about 150,000
men, if indeed this figure is reached at all. This again depends upon
circumstances. It might be advisable to divide a force of five corps
into two armies, or on the other hand it might be impossible to find
suitable leaders for more than two armies when half a million men were
present for duty. In France, organization has been carried a step
further. The bulk of the national forces is, in case of war, organized
into a "group of armies" under a commander, usually, though incorrectly,
called the _generalissimo_. This office, of course, does not exist in
peace, but the insignia, the distinctive marks of the headquarters flag,
&c., are stated in official publications, and the names of the
generalissimo and of his chief of staff are known. Under the
generalissimo would be four or five army commanders, each with three or
four army corps under him. Independent of this "group of armies" there
would be other and minor "armies" where required.

51. _Chief Command._--The leading of the "group of armies" referred to
above does not, in France, imply the supreme command, which would be
exercised by the minister of war in Paris. The German system, on the
other hand, is based upon the leadership of the national forces by the
sovereign in person, and even though the headquarters of the "supreme
war lord" (_Oberste Kriegsherr_) are actually in the field in one
theatre of operations, he directs the movements of the German armies in
all quarters. Similarly, in 1864, General Grant accompanied and
controlled as a "group" the Armies of the Potomac and the James,
supervising at the same time the operations of other groups and armies.
In the same campaign a subordinate general, Sherman, commanded a "group"
consisting of the Armies of the Tennessee, the Cumberland and the Ohio.
The question as to whether the supreme command and the command of the
principal group of armies should be in the same hands is very difficult
of solution. In practice, the method adopted in each case usually grows
out of the military and political conditions. The advantage of the
German method is that the supreme commander is in actual contact with
the troops, and can therefore form an accurate judgment of their powers.
Under these conditions the risk of having cabinet strategy forced upon
the generals is at its minimum, and more especially so if the supreme
commander is the head of the state. On the other hand, his judgment is
very liable to be influenced unduly by facts, coming under his own
notice, which may in reality have no more than a local significance.
Further, the supreme commander is at the mercy of distant subordinates
to a far greater degree than he would be if free to go from one army to
another. Thus, in 1870 the king of Prussia's headquarters before Paris
were subjected to such pressure from subordinate army commanders that on
several occasions selected staff-officers had to be sent to examine, for
the king's private information, the real state of things at the front.
The conduct of operations by one group commander in the campaign of 1864
seemed, at a distance, so eccentric and dangerous that General Grant
actually left his own group of armies and went in person to take over
command at the threatened point. Balanced judgment is thus often
impossible unless the supreme command is independent of, and in a
position to exercise general supervision over, each and every group or
army. At the other end of the scale is the system of command employed by
the Turks in 1877, in which four armies, three of them being actually on
the same theatre of war, were directed from Constantinople. This system
may be condemned unreservedly. It is recognized that, once the armies on
either side have become seriously engaged, a commander-in-chief on the
spot must direct them. Thus in 1904, while the Japanese and Russian
armies were under the supreme command of their respective sovereigns,
General Kuropatkin and Marshal Oyama personally commanded the chief
groups of armies in the field. This is substantially the same as the
system of the French army. It is therefore permissible to regard the
system pursued by the Germans in 1870, and by the Union government in
1864, more as suited to special circumstances than as a general rule. As
has been said above, the special feature of the German system of command
is the personal leadership of the German emperor, and this brings the
student at once to the consideration of another important part of the
"superior leading."

52. The _Chief of the General Staff_ is, as his title implies, the chief
staff officer of the service, and as such, he has duties of the highest
possible importance, both in peace and war. For the general subject of
staff duties see STAFF. Here we are concerned only with the peculiar
position of the chief of staff under a system in which the sovereign is
the actual commander-in-chief. It is obvious in the first place that the
sovereign may not be a great soldier, fitted by mental gifts, training
and character to be placed at the head of an army of, perhaps, a million
men. Allowing that it is imperative that, whatever he may be in himself,
the sovereign should _ex officio_ command the armies, it is easy to see
that the ablest general in these armies must be selected to act as his
adviser, irrespective of rank and seniority. This officer must therefore
be assigned to a station beyond that of his army rank, and his orders
are in fact those of the sovereign himself. Nor is it sufficient that he
should occupy an unofficial position as adviser, or _ad latus_. If he
were no more than this, the sovereign could act without his adviser
being even aware of the action taken. As the staff is the machinery for
the transmission of orders and despatches, all orders of the
commander-in-chief are signed by the chief of staff as a matter of
course, and this position is therefore that in which the adviser has the
necessary influence. The relations between the sovereign and his chief
military adviser are thus of the first importance to the smooth working
of the great military machine, and never have the possibilities of this
apparently strange system been more fully exploited than by King William
and his chief of staff von Moltke in 1866 and in 1870-71. It is not true
to say that the king was the mere figurehead of the German armies, or
that Moltke was the real commander-in-chief. Those who have said this
forget that the sole responsibility for the consequences of every order
lay with the king, and that it is precisely the fear of this
responsibilty that has made so many brilliant subordinates fail when in
chief command. The characters of the two men supplemented each other, as
also in the case of Blücher and Gneisenau and that of Radetzky and Hess.
Under these circumstances, the German system of command works, on the
whole, smoothly. Matters would, however, be different if either of the
two officers failed to realize their mutual interdependence, and the
system is in any case only required when the self-sufficing great
soldier is not available for the chief executive command.

53. _First and Second Lines._--The organization into arms and units is
of course maintained in peace as well as for war. Military forces are
further organized, in peace, into active and reserve troops, first and
second lines, &c., according to the power possessed by the executive
over the men. Broadly speaking, the latter fall into three classes,
regulars, auxiliary forces and irregular troops. The regulars or active
troops are usually liable to serve at all times and in any country to
which they may be sent. Auxiliary forces may be defined as all troops
which undergo actual military training without being constantly under
arms, and in Great Britain these were until 1908 represented by the
Militia, the Yeomanry and the Volunteers, and now by the Territorial
Force and the Special Reserve. In a country in which recruiting is by
voluntary enlistment the classification is, of course, very different
from that prevailing in a conscript army. The various "lines" are
usually composed of separate organizations; the men are recruited upon
different engagements, and receive a varying amount of training. Of the
men not permanently embodied, only the reserve of the active army has
actually served a continuous term with the colours. Other troops, called
by various appellations, of which "militia" may be taken as generic, go
through their military training at intervals. The general lines of army
organization in the case of a country recruiting by universal service
are as follows:--The male population is divided into classes, by ages,
and the total period of liability to service is usually about 25 years.
Thus at any given time, assuming two years' colour-service, the men of
20 and 21 years of age would constitute the active army serving with the
colours, those of, say, 22 and 23, the reserve. The _Landwehr_ or second
line army would consist of all men who had been through the active army
and were now aged 24 to 36. The third line would similarly consist of
men whose ages were between 36 and 44. Assuming the same annual levy,
the active army would consist of 200,000 men, its reserve 200,000, the
second line of 1,300,000, and the third of 800,000. Thus of 2,500,000
men liable to, and trained for, military service, 200,000 only would be
under arms at any given time. The simple system here outlined is of
course modified and complicated in practice owing to re-engagements by
non-commissioned officers, the speedy dismissal to the reserve of
intelligent and educated men, &c.

54. _War Reserves._--In war, the reserves increase the field armies to
400,000 men, the whole or part of the second line is called up and
formed into auxiliary regiments, brigades and divisions, and in case of
necessity the third line is also called upon, though usually this is
only in the last resort and for home defence only. The proportion of
reservists to men with the colours varies of course with the length of
service. Thus in France or Germany, with two years' service in force,
half of the rank and file of a unit in war would be men recalled from
civil life. The true military value of reservists is often questioned,
and under certain circumstances it is probable that units would take the
field at peace strength without waiting for their reservists. The
frontier guards of the continental military powers, which are expected
to move at the earliest possible moment after hostilities have begun,
are maintained at a higher effective than other units, and do not depend
to any great extent on receiving reservists. The peace footing of
cavalry and artillery units is similarly maintained at an artificial
level. An operation of the nature of a _coup de main_ would in any case
be carried out by the troops available at the moment, however large
might be the force required--twenty weak battalions would, in fact, be
employed instead of ten strong ones. There is another class of troops,
which may be called depot troops. These consist of officers and men left
behind when the active corps completed with reserves takes the field,
and they have (a) to furnish drafts for the front--and (b) to form a
nucleus upon which all later formations are built up. The troops of the
second line undertake minor work, such as guarding railways, and also
furnish drafts for the field army. Later, when they have been for some
time under arms, the second line troops are often employed by themselves
in first line. A year's training under war conditions should bring such
troops to the highest efficiency. As for irregulars, they have real
military value only when the various permanent establishments do not
take up the whole fighting strength of the nation, and thus states
having universal service armies do not, as a rule, contemplate the
employment of combatants other than those shown on the peace rolls. The
status of irregulars is ill defined, but it is practically agreed that
combatants, over whose conduct the military authorities have no
disciplinary power, should be denied the privileges of recognized
soldiers, and put to death if captured. So drastic a procedure is
naturally open to abuse and is not always expedient. Still, it is
perfectly right that the same man shall not be allowed, for example, to
shoot a sentry at one moment, and to claim the privileges of a harmless
civilian at the next. The division into first, second and third lines
follows generally from the above. The first line troops, in a conscript
army, are the "active army" or regulars, permanently under arms in peace
time, and its reserves, which are used on the outbreak of war to
complete the existing units to full strength. The German terms
_Landwehr_ and _Landsturm_ are often applied to armies of the second and
the third lines.

55. The military characteristics of the various types of regular troops
have been dealt with in considering the advantages and disadvantages of
the several forms of recruiting. It only remains to give some indication
of the advantages which such forces (irrespective of their time of
service) possess over troops which only come up for training at
intervals. Physically, the men with the colours are always superior to
the rest, owing to their constant exercise and the regularity and order
under which they live; as soldiers, they are more under the control of
their officers, who are their leaders in daily life, in closer touch
with army methods and discipline, and, as regards their formal training,
they possess infinitely greater power of strategic and tactical
manoeuvre. Their steadiness under fire is of course more to be relied
upon than that of other troops. Wellington, speaking of the contrast
between old and young soldiers (regulars), was of opinion that the chief
difference lay in the greater hardiness, power of endurance, and general
campaigning qualities given by experience. This is of course more than
ever true in respect of regular and auxiliary troops, as was strikingly
demonstrated in the Spanish-American War. On the whole, it is true to
say that only a regular army can endure defeat without dissolution, and
that volunteers, reservists or militiamen fresh from civil life may win
a victory but cannot make the fullest use of it when won. At the same
time, when they have been through one or two arduous campaigns, raw
troops become to all intents and purposes equal to any regulars. On the
other hand, the greatest military virtue of auxiliary forces is their
enthusiasm. With this quality were won the great victories of 1792-94 in
France, those of 1813 in Germany, and the beginnings of Italian unity at
Calatafimi and Palermo. The earlier days of the American Civil War
witnessed desperate fighting, of which Shiloh is the best example,
between armies which had had but the slightest military training. In the
same war the first battle of Bull Run illustrated what has been said
above as to the weaknesses of unprofessional armies. Both sides, raw and
untrained, fought for a long time with the greatest determination, after
which the defeated army was completely dissolved in rout and the victors
quite unable to pursue. So far it is the relative military value of the
professional soldier and the citizen-soldier that has been reviewed. A
continental army of the French or German stamp is differently
constituted. It is, first of all, clear that the drilled citizen-soldier
combines the qualities of training and enthusiasm. From this it follows
that a hostile "feeling" as well as a hostile "view" must animate such
an army if it is to do good service. If a modern "nation in arms" is
engaged in a purely dynastic quarrel against a professional army of
inferior strength, the result will probably be victory for the latter.
But the active army of France or Germany constitutes but a small part of
the "nation in arms," and the army for war is composed in addition of
men who have at some period in the past gone through a regular training.
Herein lies the difference between continental and British auxiliary
forces. In the French army, an ex-soldier during his ten years of
reserve service was by the law of 1905 only liable for two months'
training, and for the rest of his military career for two weeks' service
only. The further reduction of this liability was proposed in 1907 and
led to much controversy. The question of the value of auxiliary forces,
then, as between the continuous work of, say, English territorials, and
the permanent though dwindling influence of an original period of active
soldiering, is one of considerable importance. It is largely decided in
any given case by the average age of the men in the ranks.

56. The transfer of troops from the state of peace to that of war is
called _mobilization_. This is, of course, a matter which primarily
depends on good administration, and its minutest details are in all
states laid down beforehand. Reservists have to be summoned, and, on
arrival, to be clothed and equipped out of stores maintained in peace.
Officers and men of the regular army on leave have to be recalled, the
whole medically examined for physical fitness to serve, and a thousand
details have to be worked out before the unit is ready to move to its
concentration station. The concentration and the strategic deployment
are, of course, dependent upon the circumstances of each war, and the
peace organization ceases to be applicable. But throughout a war the
depots at home, the recruiting districts of second-line troops, and
above all the various arsenals, manufactories and offices controlled by
the war department are continually at work in maintaining the troops in
the field at proper strength and effectiveness.

57. _Territorial System._--The feudal system was of course a territorial
system in principle. Indeed, as has been shown above, a feudal army was
chiefly at fault owing to the dislocation of the various levies.
Concentration was equally the characteristic of the professional armies
which succeeded those of feudalism, and only such militia forces as
remained in existence preserved a local character. The origin of
territorial recruiting for first-line troops is to be found in the
"cantonal" system, said to have been introduced by Louis XIV., but
brought to the greatest perfection in Prussia under Frederick William I.
But long service and the absence of a reserve vitiated the system in
practice, since losses had to be made good by general recruiting, and
even the French Revolution may hardly be said to have produced the
territorial system as we understand it to-day. It was only in the
deliberate preparation of the Prussian army on short-service lines that
we find the beginning of the "territorial system of dislocation and
command." This is so intimately connected with the general system of
organization that it cannot be considered merely as a method of
recruiting by districts. It may be defined as a system whereby, for
purposes of command in peace, recruiting, and of organization generally,
the country is divided into districts, which are again divided and
subdivided as may be required. In a country in which universal service
prevails, an army corps district is divided into divisional districts,
these being made up of brigade and of regimental districts. Each of
these units recruits, and is in peace usually stationed, in its own
area; the artillery, cavalry and special arms are recruited for the
corps throughout the whole allotted area, and stationed at various
points within the same. Thus in the German army the III. army corps is
composed entirely of Brandenburgers. The infantry of the corps is
stationed in ten towns, the cavalry in four and the artillery in five.
In countries which adhere to voluntary recruiting, the system, depending
as it does on the calculable certainty of recruiting, is not so fully
developed, but in Great Britain the auxiliary forces have been
reorganized in divisions of all arms on a strictly territorial basis.
The advantage of the system as carried into effect in Germany is
obvious. Training is carried out with a minimum of friction and expense,
as each unit has an ample area for training. Whilst the brigadiers can
exercise general control over the colonels, and the divisional generals
over the brigadiers, there is little undue interference of superior
authority in the work of each grade, and the men, if soldiers by
compulsion, at any rate are serving close to their own homes. Most of
the reservists required on mobilization reside within a few miles of
their barracks. Living in the midst of the civil population, the troops
do not tend to become a class apart. Small garrisons are not, as
formerly, allowed to stagnate, since modern communications make
supervision easy. Further, it must be borne in mind that the essence of
the system is the organization and training for war of the whole
military population. Now so great a mass of men could not be
administered except through this decentralization of authority, and the
corollary of short service universally applied is the full territorial
system, in which the whole enrolled strength of the district is
subjected to the authority of the district commander. Practice, however,
falls short of theory, and the dangers of drawing whole units from
disaffected or unmilitary districts are often foreseen and discounted by
distributing the recruits, non-regionally, amongst more or less distant
regiments.

58. _Army Administration._--The existing systems of command and
organization, being usually based upon purely military considerations,
have thus much, indeed almost all, in common. _Administration_ differs
from them in one important respect. While the methods of command and
organization are the result of the accumulated experience of many armies
through many hundred years, the central administration in each case is
the product of the historical evolution of the particular country, and
is dependent upon forms of government, constitutions and political
parties. Thus France, after 1870, remodelled the organization of her
forces in accordance with the methods which were presumed to have given
Germany the victory, but the headquarters staff at Paris is very
different in all branches from that of Berlin. Great Britain adopted
German tactics, and to some extent even uniform, but the Army Council
has no counterpart in the administration of the German emperor's forces.

The first point for consideration, therefore, is, what is the ultimate,
and what is the proximate, authority supervising the administration? The
former is, in most countries, the people or its representatives in
parliament, for it is in their power to stop supplies, and without money
the whole military fabric must crumble. The constitutional chief of the
army is the sovereign, or, in republics, the president, but in most
countries the direct control of army matters by the representatives of
the people extends over all affairs into which the well-being of the
civil population, the expenditure of money, alleged miscarriages of
military justice, &c., enter, and it is not unusual to find grand
strategy, and even the technical deficiencies of a field-gun or rifle,
the subject of interpellation and debate. The peculiar influence of the
sovereign is in what may be termed patronage (that is, the selection of
officers to fill important positions and the general supervision of the
officer-corps), and in the fact that loyalty is the foundation of the
discipline and soldierly honour which it is the task of the officers to
inculcate into their men. In all cases the head of the state is _ipso
facto_ the head of the army. The difference between various systems may
then be held to depend on the degree of power allowed to or held by him.
This reacts upon the central administration of the army, and is the
cause of the differences of system alluded to. For the civil chief of
the executive is not necessarily a soldier, much less an expert and
capable soldier; he must, therefore, be provided with technical
advisers. The chief of the general staff is often the principal of
these, though in some cases a special commander-in-chief, or the
minister for war, or, as in France and England, a committee or council,
has the duty of advising the executive on technical matters.

59. _Branches of Administration._--In these circumstances the only
general principle of army administration common to all systems is the
division of the labour between two great branches. Military
administration, in respect of the troops and material which it has to
control, is divided between the departments of the _War Office_ and the
_General Staff_. In the staff work of subordinate units, e.g. army corps
and divisions, the same classification of duties is adopted, "general
staff" duties being performed by one set of officers, "routine staff"
duties by another.

The work of a _General Staff_ may be taken as consisting in preparation
for war, and this again, both in Great Britain and abroad, consists of
military policy in all its branches, staff duties in war, the collection
of intelligence, mobilization, plans of operations and concentration,
training, military history and geography, and the preparation of war
regulations. These subjects are usually subdivided into four or five
groups, each of which is dealt with by a separate section of the general
staff, the actual division of the work, of course, varying in different
countries. Thus, the second section of the French staff deals with "the
organization and tactics of foreign armies, study of foreign theatres of
war, and military missions abroad." A _War Office_ is concerned with
peace administration and with the provision of men and material in war.
Under the former category fall such matters as "routine" administration,
finance, justice, recruiting, promotion of officers (though not always),
barracks and buildings generally, armament, equipment and clothing, &c.,
in fact all matters not directly relevant to the training of the troops
for and the employment of the troops in war. In war, some of the
functions of a war office are suspended, but on the other hand the work
necessary for the provision of men and material to augment the army and
to make good its losses is vastly increased. In 1870 the minister of war,
von Roon, accompanied the headquarters in the field, but this arrangement
did not work well, and will not be employed again. The chief duties other
than those of the general staff fall into two classes, the "routine
staff," administration or adjutant-general's branch, which deals with all
matters affecting _personnel_, and the quartermaster-general's branch,
which supervises the provision and issue of supplies, stores and
_matériel_ of all kinds. Over and above these, provision has to be made
for control of all the technical parts of administration, such as
artillery and engineer services (in Great Britain, this, with a portion
of the quartermaster-general's department, is under the master-general of
the ordnance), and for military legislation, preparation of estimates,
&c. These are, of course, special subjects, not directly belonging to the
general administrative system. It is only requisite that the latter
should be sufficiently elastic to admit of these departments being formed
as required. However these subordinate offices may be multiplied, the
main work of the war office is in the two departments of the
adjutant-general (_personnel_) and the quartermaster-general
(_matériel_). Beyond and wholly distinct from these is the general staff,
the creation of which is perhaps the most important contribution of the
past century to the pure science of military organization.

    COMPARATIVE STRENGTH OF VARIOUS ARMIES

  (a) _Compulsory Service_ (1906).

  +-------------------------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+
  |                               |            |            |            |  Austria-  |            |
  |                               |   France.  |  Germany.  |  Russia.   |  Hungary.  |   Italy.   |
  +-------------------------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+
  | Annual Contingent for the     |            |            |            |            |            |
  |   Colours                     |    230,000 |    222,000 |    254,000 |    128,000 |     83,000 |
  | Medically unfit and exempt    |     90,000 |    127,000 |    120,000 |     57,000 |    110,000 |
  | Excused from Service in       |            |            |            |            |        |
  |   Peace, able-bodied          |     · ·    |    291,000 |    606,000 |    285,000 |    122,000 |
  |                               +------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+
  | Total of Men becoming liable  |            |            |            |            |            |
  |   for service in 1907         |    320,000 |    540,000 |    980,000 |    470,000 |    315,000 |
  +-------------------------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+
  | Total Permanent Armed Force   |   610,000  |    610,000 |  1,226,000 |    356,000 |    269,000 |
  |  in Peace                     |(not includ-|            |            |            |            |
  |                               |ing colonial|            |            |            |            |
  |                               |   troops   |            |            |            |            |
  +-------------------------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+
  | First-Line Troops, war-       |            |            |            |            |            |
  |   strength (estimated)        |  1,350,000 |  1,675,000 |  2,187,000 |    950,000 |    800,000 |
  | Second-Line Troops, war-      |            |            |            |            |            |
  |   strength (estimated)        |  3,000,000 |  2,275,000 |  1,429,000 |  1,450,000 |  1,150,000 |
  | Numbers available in excess   |            |            |            |            |            |
  |   of these (estimated)        |    450,000 |  3,950,000 |  9,384,000 |  5,000,000 |  1,200,000 |
  |                               +------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+
  | Total War Resources of all    |            |            |            |            |            |
  |   kinds                       |  4,800,000 |  7,900,000 | 13,000,000 |  7,400,000 |  3,150,000 |
  +-------------------------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+
  | Annual Military Expenditure-- |            |            |            |            |            |
  |  total                        |£27,720,000 |£32,228,000 |£36,080,000 |£15,840,000 |£11,280,000 |
  | Annual Military Expenditure-- |            |            |            |            |            |
  |  per head of population       |            |            |            |            |            |
  |  (approximate)                |  13s. 9d.  |  10s. 9d.  |   5s. 3d.  |   6s. 8d.  |   6s. 5d.  |
  +-------------------------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+------------+

  (b) _Authorized Establishments and Approximate Military Resources of
  the British Empire_ (1906-1907).

  +-------------------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+----------+-----------+
  |                               |         |         |         | Native  |          |           |
  |                               | British |Reserves |Auxiliary| Troops  | Colonial |           |
  |                               | Regular |   for   | Forces. |(Regular,|  Forces  |  Total.   |
  |                               |  Army.  | Regular |         | Reserve,|(various).|           |
  |                               |         |  Army.  |         | &c.).   |          |           |
  +-------------------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+----------+-----------+
  | Great Britain                 | 117,000 | 120,000 | 500,000 |   · ·   |   · ·    |   737,000 |
  | Channel Islands, Malta,       |         |         |         |         |          |           |
  |   Bermuda, Colonies and       |         |         |         |         |          |           |
  |   Dependencies                |  65,000 |   · ·   |   6,000 |   · ·   |  30,000  |   101,000 |
  | India                         |  75,000 |   · ·   |  30,000 | 202,000 |   · ·    |   307,000 |
  | Canadian Forces               |   · ·   |   · ·   |  46,000 |   · ·   |  59,000  |   105,000 |
  |                               |         |         |         |         |(reserves)|           |
  | Australian Forces (including  |   · ·   |   · ·   |  70,000 |   · ·   |   · ·    |    70,000 |
  |     New Zealand)              |         |         | (appr.) |         |          |           |
  | South African Forces          |   · ·   |   · ·   |  20,000 |   · ·   |   · ·    |    20,000 |
  |                               |         |         | (appr.) |         |          |           |
  |                               +---------+---------+---------+---------+----------+-----------+
  |    Totals                     | 257,000 | 120,000 | 672,000 | 202,000 |  89,000  | 1,340,000 |
  +-------------------------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+----------+-----------+

  _Note._--Ex-soldiers of regular and auxiliary forces, still fit for
  service, and estimated _levées en masse_, are not counted. Enlistment
  chiefly voluntary.

  (c) The Regular Army of the United States has a maximum authorized
  establishment (1906) of 60,000 enlisted men; the Organized Militia was
  at the same date 110,000 strong. Voluntary enlistment throughout. (See
  UNITED STATES.) In 1906-1907 the total numbers available for a _levée
  en masse_ were estimated at 13,000,000.

BRITISH ARMY

60. Prior to the Norman Conquest the armed force of England was
essentially a national militia. Every freeman was bound to bear arms for
the defence of the country, or for the maintenance of order. To give
some organization and training to the levy, the several sheriffs had
authority to call out the contingents of their shires for exercise. The
"fyrd," as the levy was named, was available for home service only, and
could not be moved even from its county except in the case of emergency;
and it was principally to repel oversea invasions that its services
were required. Yet even in those days the necessity of some more
permanent force was felt, and bodies of paid troops were maintained by
the kings at their own cost. Thus Canute and his successors, and even
some of the great earls kept up a household force (_huscarles_). The
English army at Hastings consisted of the _fyrd_ and the corps of
_huscarles_.

The English had fought on foot; but the mailed horseman had now become
the chief factor in war, and the Conqueror introduced into England the
system of tenure by knight-service familiar in Normandy. This was based
on the unit of the feudal host, the _constabularia_ of ten knights, the
Conqueror granting lands in return for finding one or more of these
units (in the case of great barons) or some fraction of them (in the
case of lesser tenants). The obligation was to provide knights to serve,
with horse and arms, for forty days in each year at their own charges.
This obligation could be handed on by sub-enfeoffment through a whole
series of under-tenants. The system being based, not on the duty of
personal service, but on the obligation to supply one or more knights
(or it might be only the fraction of a knight), it was early found
convenient to commute this for a money payment known as "scutage" (see
KNIGHT SERVICE and SCUTAGE). This money enabled the king to hire
mercenaries, or pay such of the feudal troops as were willing to serve
beyond the usual time. From time to time proclamations and statutes were
issued reminding the holders of knights' fees of their duties; but the
immediate object was generally to raise money rather than to enforce
personal service, which became more and more rare. The feudal system had
not, however, abrogated the old Saxon levies, and from these arose two
national institutions--the _posse comitatus_, liable to be called out by
the sheriff to maintain the king's peace, and later the _militia_
(q.v.). The _posse comitatus_, or power of the county, included all
males able to bear arms, peers and spiritual men excepted; and though
primarily a police force it was also bound to assist in the defence of
the country. This levy was organized by the Assize of Arms under Henry
II. (1181), and subsequently under Edward I. (1285) by the so-called
"Statute of Winchester," which determined the numbers and description of
weapons to be kept by each man according to his property, and also
provided for their periodical inspection. The early Plantagenets made
free use of mercenaries. But the weakness of the feudal system in
England was preparing, through the 12th and 13th centuries, a nation in
arms absolutely unique in the middle ages. The Scottish and Welsh wars
were, of course, fought by the feudal levy, but this levy was far from
being the mob of unwilling peasants usual abroad, and from the _fyrd_
came the English archers, whose fame was established by Edward I.'s
wars, and carried to the continent by Edward III. Edward III. realized
that there was better material to be had in his own country than abroad,
and the army with which he invaded France was an army of national
mercenaries, or, more simply, of English soldiers. The army at Creçy was
composed exclusively of English, Welsh and Irish. From the pay list of
the army at the siege of Calais (1346) it appears that all ranks, from
the prince of Wales downward, were paid, no attempt being made to force
even the feudal nobles to serve abroad at their own expense. These
armies were raised mainly by contracts entered into "with some knight or
gentleman expert in war, and of great revenue and livelihood in the
country, to serve the king in war with a number of men." Copies of the
indentures executed when Henry V. raised his army for the invasion of
France in 1415 are in existence. Under these the contracting party
agreed to serve the king abroad for one year, with a given number of men
equipped according to agreement, and at a stipulated rate of pay. A
certain sum was usually paid in advance, and in many cases the crown
jewels and plate were given in pledge for the rest. The profession of
arms seems to have been profitable. The pay of the soldier was high as
compared with that of the ordinary labourer, and he had the prospect of
a share of plunder in addition, so that it was not difficult to raise
men where the commander had a good military reputation. Edward III. is
said to have declined the services of numbers of foreign mercenaries who
wished to enrol under him in his wars against France.

The funds for the payment of these armies were provided partly from the
royal revenues, partly from the fines paid in lieu of military service,
and other fines arbitrarily imposed, and partly by grants from
parliament. As the soldier's contract usually ended with the war, and
the king had seldom funds to renew it even if he so wished, the armies
disbanded of themselves at the close of each war. To secure the services
of the soldier during his contract, acts were passed (18 Henry VI. c.
19; and 7 Henry VII. c. 1) inflicting penalties for desertion; and in
Edward VI.'s reign an act "touching the true service of captains and
soldiers" was passed, somewhat of the nature of a Mutiny Act.

61. It is difficult to summarize the history of the army between the
Hundred Years' War and 1642. The final failure of the English arms in
France was soon followed by the Wars of the Roses, and in the long
period of civil strife the only national force remaining to England was
the Calais garrison. Henry VIII. was a soldier-king, but he shared the
public feeling for the old bow and bill, and English armies which served
abroad did not, it seems, win the respect of the advanced professional
soldiers of the continent. In 1519 the Venetian ambassador described the
English forces as consisting of 150,000 men whose peculiar, though not
exclusive, weapon was the long bow (Fortescue i. 117). The national levy
made in 1588 to resist the Armada and the threat of invasion produced
about 750 lancers (heavy-armed cavalry), 2000 light horse and 56,000
foot, beside 20,000 men employed in watching the coasts. The small
proportion of mounted men is very remarkable in a country in which
Cromwell was before long to illustrate the full power of cavalry on the
battlefield. It is indeed not unfair to regard this army as a
miscellaneous levy of inferior quality.

It was in cavalry that England was weakest, and by three different acts
it was sought to improve the breed of horses, though the light horse of
the northern counties had a good reputation, and even won the admiration
of the emperor Charles V. Perhaps the best organized force in England at
this time was the London volunteer association which ultimately became
the Honourable Artillery Company. At Floddon the spirit of the old
English yeomanry triumphed over the outward form of continental
battalions which the Scots had adopted, and doubtless the great victory
did much to retard military progress in England. The chief service of
Henry VIII. to the British army was the formation of an artillery train,
in which he took a special interest. Before he died the forces came to
consist of a few permanent troops (the bodyguard and the fortress
artillery service), the militia or general levy, which was for home, and
indeed for county, service only, and the paid armies which were
collected for a foreign war and disbanded at the conclusion of peace,
and were recruited on the same principle of indents which had served in
the Hundred Years' War. In the reign of Mary, the old Statute of
Winchester was revised (1553), and the new act provided for a
readjustment of the county contingents and in some degree for the
rearmament of the militia. But, from the fall of Calais and the
expedition to Havre up to the battle of the Dunes a century later, the
intervention of British forces in foreign wars was always futile and
generally disastrous. During this time, however, the numerous British
regiments in the service of Holland learned, in the long war of Dutch
independence, the art of war as it had developed on the continent since
1450, and assimilated the regimental system and the drill and armament
of the best models. Thus it was that in 1642 there were many hundreds of
trained and war-experienced officers and sergeants available for the
armies of the king and the parliament. By this time bows and bills had
long disappeared even from the militia, and the Thirty Years' War,
which, even more than the Low Countries, offered a career for the
adventurous man, contributed yet more trained officers and soldiers to
the English and Scottish forces. So closely indeed was war now studied
by Englishmen that the respective adherents of the Dutch and the Swedish
systems quarrelled on the eve of the battle of Edgehill. Francis and
Horace Vere, Sir John Norris, and other Englishmen had become generals
of European reputation. Skippon, Astley, Goring, Rupert, and many others
soon to be famous were distinguished as company and regimental officers
in the battles and sieges of Germany and the Low Countries.

The home forces of England had, as has been said, little or nothing to
revive their ancient renown. Instead, they had come to be regarded as a
menace to the constitution. In Queen Elizabeth's time the demands of the
Irish wars had led to frequent forced levies, and the occasional
billeting of the troops in England also gave rise to murmurs, but the
brilliancy and energy of her reign covered a great deal, and the
peaceful policy of her successor removed all immediate cause of
complaint. But after the accession of Charles I. we find the army a
constant and principal source of dispute between the king and
parliament, until under William III. it is finally established on a
constitutional footing. Charles, wishing to support the Elector Palatine
in the Thirty Years' War, raised an army of 10,000 men. He was already
encumbered with debts, and the parliament refused all grants, on which
he had recourse to forced loans. The army was sent to Spain, but
returned without effecting anything, and was not disbanded, as usual,
but billeted on the inhabitants. The billeting was the more deeply
resented as it appeared that the troops were purposely billeted on those
who had resisted the loan. Forced loans, billeting and martial law--all
directly connected with the maintenance of the army--formed the main
substance of the grievances set forth in the Petition of Right. In
accepting this petition, Charles gave up the right to maintain an army
without consent of parliament; and when in 1639 he wished to raise one
to act against the rebellious Scots, parliament was called together, and
its sanction obtained, on the plea that the army was necessary for the
defence of England. This army again became the source of dispute between
the king and parliament, and finally both sides appealed to arms.

62. The first years of the Great Rebellion (q.v.) showed primarily the
abundance of good officers produced by the wars on the continent, and in
the second place the absolute inadequacy of the military system of the
country; the commissions of array, militia ordinances, &c., had at last
to give way to regular methods of enlistment and a central army
administration. It was clear, at the same time, that when the struggle
was one of principles and not of dynastic politics, excellent recruits,
far different from the wretched levies who had been gathered together
for the Spanish war, were to be had in any reasonable number. These
causes combined to produce the "New Model" which, originating in
Cromwell's own cavalry and the London trained bands of foot, formed of
picked men and officers, severely disciplined, and organized and
administered in the right way, quickly proved its superiority over all
other armies in the field, and in a few years raised its general to
supreme civil power. The 15th of February 1645 was the birthday of the
British standing army, and from its first concentration at Windsor Park
dates the scarlet uniform. The men were for the most part voluntarily
enlisted from existing corps, though deficiencies had immediately to be
made good by impressment.

Four months later the New Model decided the quarrel of king and
parliament at Naseby. When Cromwell, the first lieutenant-general and
the second captain-general of the army, sent his veterans to take part
in the wars of the continent they proved themselves a match for the best
soldiers in Europe. On the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 the army,
now some 80,000 strong, was disbanded. It had enforced the execution of
Charles I., it had dissolved parliament, and England had been for years
governed under a military regime. Thus the most popular measure of the
Restoration was the dissolution of the army. Only Monk's regiment of
foot (now the Coldstream Guards) survived to represent the New Model in
the army of to-day. At the same time the troops (now regiments) of
household cavalry, and the regiment of foot which afterwards became the
Grenadier Guards, were formed, chiefly from Royalists, though the
disbanded New Model contributed many experienced recruits. The permanent
forces of the crown came to consist once more of the "garrisons and
guards," maintained by the king from the revenue allotted to him for
carrying on the government of the country. The "garrisons" were
commissioned to special fortresses--the Tower of London, Portsmouth, &c.
The "guards" comprised the sovereign's bodyguards ("the yeomen of the
guard" and "gentlemen-at-arms," who had existed since the times of Henry
VII. and VIII.), and the regiments mentioned above. Even this small
force, at first not exceeding 3000 men, was looked on with jealousy by
parliament, and every attempt to increase it was opposed. The
acquisition of Tangier and Bombay, as part of the dower of the infanta
of Portugal, led to the formation of a troop of horse (now the 1st Royal
Dragoons) and a regiment of infantry (the 2nd, now Queen's R.W. Surrey,
regiment) for the protection of the former; and a regiment of infantry
(afterwards transferred to the East India Company) to hold the latter
(1661). These troops, not being stationed in the kingdom, created no
distrust; but whenever, as on several occasions during Charles's reign,
considerable armies were raised, they were mostly disbanded when the
occasion ceased. Several regiments, however, were added to the permanent
force, including Dumbarton's regiment (the 1st or Royal Scots, nicknamed
Pontius Pilate's Bodyguard)--which had a long record of service in the
armies of the continent, and represented the Scots brigade of Gustavus
Adolphus's army--and the 3rd Buffs, representing the English regiments
of the Dutch army and through them the volunteers of 1572, and on
Charles's death in 1685 the total force of "guards and garrisons" had
risen to 16,500, of whom about one-half formed what we should now call
the standing army.

63. James II., an experienced soldier and sailor, was more obstinate
than his predecessor in his efforts to increase the army, and Monmouth's
rebellion afforded him the opportunity. A force of about 20,000 men was
maintained in England, and a large camp formed at Hounslow. Eight
cavalry and twelve infantry regiments (the senior of which was the 7th
"Royal" Fusiliers, formed on a new French model) were raised, and given
the numbers which, with few exceptions, they still bear. James even
proposed to disband the militia, which had not distinguished itself in
the late rebellion, and further augment the standing army; and although
the proposal was instantly rejected, he continued to add to the army
till the Revolution deprived him of his throne. The army which he had
raised was to a great extent disbanded, the Irish soldiers especially,
whom he had introduced in large numbers on account of their religion,
being all sent home.

The condition of the army immediately engaged the attention of
parliament. The Bill of Rights had definitely established that "the
raising or keeping of a standing army within the kingdom, unless it be
by the consent of parliament, is against the law," and past experience
made them very jealous of such a force. But civil war was imminent,
foreign war certain; and William had only a few Dutch troops, and the
remains of James's army, with which to meet the storm. Parliament
therefore sanctioned a standing army, trusting to the checks established
by the Bill of Rights and Act of Settlement, and by placing the pay of
the army under the control of the Commons. An event soon showed the
altered position of the army. A regiment mutinied and declared for
James. It was surrounded and compelled to lay down its arms; but William
found himself without legal power to deal with the mutineers. He
therefore applied to parliament, and in 1689 was passed the first Mutiny
Act, which, after repeating the provisions regarding the army inserted
in the Bill of Rights, and declaring the illegality of martial law, gave
power to the crown to deal with the offences of mutiny and desertion by
courts-martial. From this event is often dated the history of the
standing army as a constitutional force (but see Fortescue, _British
Army_, i. 335).

64. Under William the army was considerably augmented. The old regiments
of James's army were reorganized, retaining, however, their original
numbers, and three of cavalry and eleven of infantry (numbered to the
28th) were added. In 1690 parliament sanctioned a force of 62,000 men,
further increased to 65,000 in 1691; but on peace being made in 1697
the Commons immediately passed resolutions to the effect that the land
forces be reduced to 7000 men in England and 12,000 in Ireland. The War
of the Spanish Succession quickly obliged Great Britain again to raise a
large army, at one time exceeding 200,000 men; but of these the greater
number were foreign troops engaged for the continental war. Fortescue
(_op. cit._ i. 555) estimates the British forces at home and abroad as
70,000 men at the highest figure. After the peace of Utrecht the force
was again reduced to 8000 men in Great Britain and 11,000 in the
plantations (i.e. colonies) and abroad. From that time to the present
the strength of the army has been determined by the annual votes of
parliament, and though frequently the subject of warm debates in both
houses, it has ceased to be a matter of dispute between the crown and
parliament. The following table shows the fluctuations from that time
onward--the peace years showing the average peace strength, the war
years the maximum to which the forces were raised:--

        PEACE.           |          WAR.
  Year.         Number.  |   Year.         Number.
  1750          18,857   |   1745          74,187
  1793          17,013   |   1761          67,776
  1822          71,790   |   1777          90,734
  1845         100,011   |   1812         245,996
  1857         156,995   |   1856         275,079
  1866         203,404   |   1858         222,784

  _Note._--Prior to 1856 the British forces serving in India are not
  included.

During William's reign the small English army bore an honourable part in
the wars against Louis XIV., and especially distinguished itself under
the king at Steinkirk, Neerwinden and Namur. Twenty English regiments
took part in the campaign of 1694. In the great wars of Queen Anne's
reign the British army under Marlborough acquired a European reputation.
The cavalry, which had called forth the admiration of Prince Eugene when
passed in review before him after its long march across Germany (1704),
especially distinguished itself in the battle of Blenheim, and
Ramillies, Oudenarde and Malplaquet were added to the list of English
victories. But the army as usual was reduced at once, and even the
cadres of old regiments were disbanded, though the alarm of Jacobite
insurrections soon brought about the re-creation of many of these.
During the reign of the first and second Georges an artillery corps was
organized, and the army further increased by five regiments of cavalry
and thirty-five of infantry. Fresh laurels were won at Dettingen (1743),
in which battle twenty English regiments took part; and though Fontenoy
(q.v.) was a day of disaster for the English arms, it did not lower
their reputation, but rather added to it. Six regiments of infantry won
the chief glory of Prince Ferdinand's victory of Minden (q.v.) in 1759,
and throughout the latter part of the Seven Years' War the British
contingent of Ferdinand's army served with almost unvarying distinction
in numerous actions. About this time the first English regiments were
sent to India, and the 39th shared in Clive's victory at Plassey. During
the first half of George III.'s reign the army was principally occupied
in America; and though the conquest of Canada may be counted with pride
among its exploits, this page in its history is certainly the darkest.
English armies capitulated at Saratoga and at Yorktown, and the war
ended by the evacuation of the revolted states of America and the
acknowledgment of their independence.

65. Before passing to the great French Revolutionary wars, from which a
fresh period in the history of the army may be dated, it will be well to
review the general condition of the army in the preceding century,
injured as it was by the distrust of parliament and departmental
weakness and corruption which went far to neutralize the good work of
the duke of Cumberland as commander-in-chief and of Pitt as war
administrator. Regiments were raised almost as in the days of the
Edwards. The crown contracted with a distinguished soldier, or gentleman
of high position, who undertook to raise the men, receiving a certain
sum as bounty-money for each recruit. In some cases, in lieu of money,
the contractor received the nomination of all or some of the officers,
and recouped himself by selling the commissions. This system--termed
"raising men for rank"--was retained for many years, and originally
helped to create the "purchase system" of promotion. For the maintenance
of the regiment the colonel received an annual sum sufficient to cover
the pay of the men, and the expenses of clothing and of recruiting. The
colonel was given a "beating order," without which no enlistment was
legal, and was responsible for maintaining his regiment at full
strength. "Muster masters" were appointed to muster the regiments, and
to see that the men for whom pay was drawn were really effective.
Sometimes, when casualties were numerous, the allowance was insufficient
to meet the cost of recruiting, and special grants were made. In war
time the ranks were also filled by released debtors, pardoned criminals,
and impressed paupers and vagrants. Where the men were raised by
voluntary enlistment, the period of service was a matter of contract
between the colonel and the soldier, and the engagement was usually for
life; but exceptional levies were enlisted for the duration of war, or
for periods of three or five years. As for the officers, the low rate of
pay and the purchase system combined to exclude all but men of
independent incomes. Appointments (except when in the gift of the
colonel) were made by the king at home, and by the commander-in-chief
abroad; even in Ireland the power of appointment rested with the local
commander of the forces until the Union. The soldier was clothed by his
colonel, the charge being defrayed from the "stock fund." The army lived
in barracks, camps or billets. The barrack accommodation in Great
Britain at the beginning of the 18th century only sufficed for five
thousand men; and though it had gradually risen to twenty thousand in
1792, a large part of the army was constantly in camps and billets--the
latter causing endless complaints and difficulties.

66. The first efforts of the army in the long war with France did not
tend to raise its reputation amongst the armies of Europe. The campaigns
of allied armies under the duke of York in the Netherlands, in which
British contingents figured largely, were uniformly unsuccessful
(1793-94 and 1799), though in this respect they resembled those of
almost all soldiers who commanded against the "New French" army. The
policy of the younger Pitt sent thousands of the best soldiers to
unprofitable employment, and indeed to death, in the West Indies. At
home the administration was corrupt and ineffective, and the people
generally shared the contemptuous feeling towards the regular army which
was then prevalent in Europe. But a better era began with the
appointment of Frederick Augustus, duke of York, as commander-in-chief
of the army. He did much to improve its organization, discipline and
training, and was ably seconded by commanders of distinguished ability.
Under Abercromby in Egypt, under Stuart at Maida, and under Lake,
Wellesley and others in India, the British armies again attached victory
to their standards, and made themselves feared and respected. Later,
Napoleon's threat of invading England excited her martial spirit to the
highest pitch to which it had ever attained. Finally, her military glory
was raised by the series of successful campaigns in the Peninsula, until
it culminated in the great victory of Waterloo; and the army emerged
from the war with the most solidly founded reputation of any in Europe.

The events of this period belong to the history of Europe, and fall
outside the province of an article dealing only with the army. The great
augmentations required during the war were effected partly by raising
additional regiments, but principally by increasing the number of
battalions, some regiments being given as many as four. On the
conclusion of peace these battalions were reduced, but the regiments
were retained, and the army was permanently increased from about twenty
thousand, the usual peace establishment before the war, to an average of
eighty thousand. The duke of York, on first appointment to the command,
had introduced a uniform drill throughout the army, which was further
modified according to Sir David Dundas's system in 1800; and, under the
direction of Sir John Moore and others, a high perfection of drill was
attained. At the beginning of the war, the infantry, like that of the
continental powers, was formed in three ranks; but a two-rank formation
had been introduced in America and in India and gradually became
general, and in 1809 was finally approved. In the Peninsula the army was
permanently organized in divisions, usually consisting of two brigades
of three or four battalions each, and one or two batteries of artillery.
The duke of Wellington had also brought the commissariat and the army
transport to a high pitch of perfection, but in the long peace which
followed these establishments were reduced or broken up.

67. The period which elapsed between Waterloo and the Crimean War is
marked by a number of Indian and colonial wars, but by no organic
changes in the army, with perhaps the single exception of the Limited
Service Act of 1847, by which enlistment for ten or twelve years, with
power to re-engage to complete twenty-one, was substituted for the life
enlistments hitherto in force. The army went to sleep on the laurels and
recollections of the Peninsula. The duke of Wellington, for many years
commander-in-chief, was too anxious to hide it away in the colonies in
order to save it from further reductions or utter extinction, to attempt
any great administrative reforms. The force which was sent to the Crimea
in 1854 was an agglomeration of battalions, individually of the finest
quality, but unused to work together, without trained staff,
administrative departments or army organization of any kind. The lesson
of the winter before Sevastopol was dearly bought, but was not thrown
away. From that time successive war ministers and commanders-in-chief
have laboured perseveringly at the difficult task of army organization
and administration. Foremost in the work was Sidney Herbert (Lord
Herbert of Lea), the soldier's friend, who fell a sacrifice to his
labours (1861), but not before he had done much for the army. The whole
system of administration was revised. In 1854 it was inconceivably
complicated and cumbersome. The "secretary of state for war and
colonies," sitting at the Colonial Office, had a general but vague
control, practically limited to times of war. The "secretary at war" was
the parliamentary representative of the army, and exercised a certain
financial control, not extending, however, to the ordnance corps. The
commander-in-chief was responsible to the sovereign alone in all matters
connected with the discipline, command or patronage of the army, but to
the secretary at war in financial matters. The master-general and board
of ordnance were responsible for the supply of material on requisition,
but were otherwise independent, and had the artillery and engineers
under them. The commissariat department had its headquarters at the
treasury, and until 1852 the militia were under the home secretary. A
number of minor subdepartments, more or less independent, also existed,
causing endless confusion, correspondence and frequent collision. In
1854 the business of the colonies was separated from that of war, and
the then secretary of state, the duke of Newcastle, assumed control over
all the other administrative officers. In the following year the
secretary of state was appointed secretary at war also, and the duties
of the two offices amalgamated. The same year the commissariat office
was transferred to the war department, and the Board of Ordnance
abolished, its functions being divided between the commander-in-chief
and the secretary of state. The minor departments were gradually
absorbed, and the whole administration divided under two great chiefs,
sitting at the war office and Horse Guards respectively. In 1870 these
two were welded into one, and the war office now existing was
constituted.

Corresponding improvements were effected in every branch. The system of
clothing the soldiers was altered, the contracts being taken from the
colonels of regiments, who received a money allowance instead, and the
clothing supplied from government manufactories. The pay, food and
general condition of the soldier were improved; reading and recreation
rooms, libraries, gymnasia and facilities for games of all kinds being
provided. Barracks (q.v.) were built on improved principles, and a large
permanent camp was formed at Aldershot, where considerable forces were
collected and manoeuvred together. Various educational establishments
were opened, a staff college was established for the instruction of
officers wishing to qualify for the staff, and regimental schools were
improved.

68. The Indian Mutiny of 1857, followed by the transference of the
government of India, led to important changes. The East India Company's
white troops were amalgamated with the Queen's army, and the whole
reorganized (see _Indian Army_ below).

The fact that such difficulties as those of 1854 and 1857, not to speak
of the disorders of 1848, had been surmounted by the weak army which
remained over from the reductions of forty years, coupled with the
instantaneous and effective rejoinder to the threats of the French
colonels in 1859--the creation of the Volunteer Force--certainly lulled
the nation and its representatives into a false sense of security. Thus
the two obvious lessons of the German successes of 1866 and 1870--the
power of a national army for offensive invasion, and the rapidity with
which such an army when thoroughly organized could be moved--created the
greatest sensation in England. The year 1870 is, therefore, of prime
importance in the history of the regular forces of the crown. The
strength of the home forces at different times between 1815 and 1870 is
given as follows (Biddulph, _Lord Cardwell at the War Office_):--

  +------+-----------------+--------------+-------------+
  |      |    Regulars.    | Auxiliaries. | Field Guns. |
  +------+-----------------+--------------+-------------+
  | 1820 |      64,426     |    60,740    |      22     |
  | 1830 |      50,876     |    34,614    |      30     |
  | 1840 |      53,379     |    20,791    |      30     |
  | 1850 |      68,538     |    29,868    |      70     |
  | 1860 |     100,701     |   229,301    |     180     |
  | 1870 |      89,051     |   281,692    |     180     |
  |      | (later 109,000) |              |             |
  +------+-----------------+--------------+-------------+

69. The period of reform commences therefore with 1870, and is connected
indissolubly with the name of Edward, Lord Cardwell, secretary of state
for war 1869-1874. In the matter of organization the result of his
labours was seen in the perfectly arranged expedition to Ashanti (1874);
as for recruiting, the introduction of short service and reserve
enlistment together with many rearrangements of pay, &c., proved so far
popular that the number of men annually enlisted was more than trebled
(11,742 in 1869; 39,971 in 1885; 40,729 in 1898), and so far efficient
that "Lord Cardwell's ... system, with but small modification, gave us
during the Boer War 80,000 reservists, of whom 96 or 97% were found
efficient, and has enabled us to keep an army of 150,000 regulars in the
field for 15 months" (Rt. Hon. St John Brodrick, House of Commons, 8th
of March 1901). The localization of the army, subsequently completed by
the territorial system of 1882, was commenced under Cardwell's régime,
and a measure which encountered much powerful opposition at the time,
the abolition of the purchase of commissions, was also effected by him
(1871). The machinery of administration was improved, and autumn
manoeuvres were practised on a scale hitherto unknown in England. In
1871 certain powers over the militia, formerly held by lords-lieutenant,
were transferred to the crown, and the auxiliary forces were placed
directly under the generals commanding districts. In 1881 came an
important change in the infantry of the line, which was entirely
remodelled in two-battalion regiments bearing territorial titles. This
measure (the "linked battalion" system) aroused great opposition; it was
dictated chiefly by the necessity of maintaining the Indian and colonial
garrisons at full strength, and was begun during Lord Cardwell's tenure
of office, the principle being that each regiment should have one
battalion at home and one abroad, the latter being fed by the former,
which in its turn drew upon the reserve to complete it for war. The
working of the system is to be considered as belonging to present
practice rather than to history, and the reader is therefore referred to
the article UNITED KINGDOM. On these general lines the army progressed
up to 1899, when the Boer War called into the field on a distant theatre
of war all the resources of the regular army, and in addition drew
largely upon the existing auxiliary forces, and even upon wholly
untrained civilians, for the numbers required to make war in an area
which comprised nearly all Africa south of the Zambezi. As the result
of this war (see TRANSVAAL) successive schemes of reform were undertaken
by the various war ministers, leading up to Mr Haldane's "territorial"
scheme (1908), which put the organization of the forces in the United
Kingdom (q.v.) on a new basis.

Innovations had not been unknown in the period immediately preceding the
war; as a single example we may take the development of the mounted
infantry (q.v.). It was natural that the war itself, and especially a
war of so peculiar a character, should intensify the spirit of
innovation. The corresponding period in the German army lasted from 1871
to 1888, and such a period of unsettlement is indeed the common,
practically the universal, result of a war on a large scale. Much that
was of value in the Prussian methods, faithfully and even slavishly
copied by Great Britain as by others after 1870, was temporarily
forgotten, but the pendulum swung back again, and the Russo-Japanese War
led to the disappearance, so far as Europe was concerned, of many
products of the period of doubt and controversy which followed the
struggle in South Africa. Side by side with continuous discussions of
the greater questions of military policy, amongst these being many
well-reasoned proposals for universal service, the technical and
administrative efficiency of the service has undergone great
improvement, and this appears to be of more real and permanent value
than the greater part of the solutions given for the larger problems.
The changes in the organization of the artillery afford the best
evidence of this spirit of practical and technical reform. In the first
place the old "royal regiment" was divided into two branches. The
officers for the field and horse artillery stand now on one seniority
list for promotion, the garrison, heavy and mountain batteries on
another. In each branch important changes of organization have been also
made. In the field branch, both for Royal Field and Royal Horse
Artillery, the battery is no longer the one unit for all purposes. A
lieutenant-colonel's command, the "brigade," has been created. It
consists of a group, in the horse artillery of two, in the field
artillery of three batteries. For the practical training of the horse
and field artillery a large area of ground on the wild open country of
Dartmoor, near Okehampton, has for some years been utilized. A similar
school has been started at Glen Imaal in Ireland, and a new training
ground has been opened on Salisbury Plain. Similarly, with the Royal
Garrison Artillery a more perfect system has been devised for the
regulation and practice of the fire of each fortress, in accordance with
the varying circumstances of its position, &c. A practice school for the
garrison artillery has been established at Lydd, but the various coast
fortresses themselves carry out regular practice with service
ammunition.

INDIAN ARMY

70. Historically, the Indian army grew up in three distinct divisions,
the Bengal, Madras and Bombay armies. This separation was the natural
result of the original foundation of separate settlements and factories
in India; and each retains to the present day much of its old identity.

  _Bengal._--The English traders in Bengal were long restricted by the
  native princes to a military establishment of an ensign and 30 men;
  and this force may be taken as the germ of the Indian army. In 1681
  Bengal received the first reinforcement from Madras, and two years
  later a company was sent from Madras, raising the little Bengal army
  to a strength of 250 Europeans. In 1695 native soldiers were first
  enlisted. In 1701-1702 the garrison of Calcutta consisted of 120
  soldiers and seamen gunners. In 1756 occurred the defence of Calcutta
  against Suraj-ud-Dowlah, and the terrible tragedy of the Black Hole.
  The work of reconquest and punishment was carried out by an expedition
  from Madras, and in the little force with which Clive gained the great
  victory of Plassey the Bengal army was represented by a few hundred
  men only (the British 39th, now Dorsetshire regiment, which was also
  present, was the first King's regiment sent to India, and bears the
  motto _Primus in Indis_); but from this date the military power of the
  Company rapidly increased. A company of artillery had been organized
  in 1748; and in 1757, shortly before Plassey, the 1st regiment of
  Bengal native infantry was raised. Next, in 1759 the native infantry
  was augmented, in 1760 dragoons were raised, and in 1763 the total
  forces amounted to 1500 Europeans and 12 battalions of native infantry
  (11,500 men). In 1765 the European infantry was divided into 3
  regiments, and the whole force was organized in 3 brigades, each
  consisting of 1 company of artillery, 1 regiment European infantry, 1
  troop of native cavalry, and 7 battalions of sepoys. In 1766, on the
  reduction of some money allowances, a number of officers of the Bengal
  army agreed to resign their commissions simultaneously. This dangerous
  combination was promptly put down by Clive, to whom the Bengal army
  may be said to owe its existence.

  The constant wars and extensions of dominion of the next thirty years
  led to further augmentations; the number of brigades and of European
  regiments was increased to 6; and in 1794 the Bengal army numbered
  about 3500 Europeans and 24,000 natives.

  71. _Madras._--The first armed force in the Madras presidency was the
  little garrison of Armegon on the Coromandel coast, consisting of 28
  soldiers. In 1644 Fort St George was built and garrisoned, and in 1653
  Madras became a presidency. In 1745 the garrison of Fort St George
  consisted of 200 Europeans, while a similar number, with the addition
  of 200 "Topasses" (descendants of the Portuguese), garrisoned Fort St
  David. In 1748 the various independent companies on the Coromandel
  coast and other places were consolidated into the Madras European
  regiment. From this time the military history of the Madras army was
  full of incident, and it bore the principal part in Clive's victories
  of Arcot, Kavaripak and Plassey. In 1754 the 39th regiment of the
  Royal army was sent to Madras. In 1758 three others followed. In 1772
  the Madras army numbered 3000 European infantry and 16,000 natives,
  and in 1784 the number of native troops had risen to 34,000.

  72. _Bombay._--The island of Bombay formed part of the marriage
  portion received by Charles II. with the infanta of Portugal, and in
  1662 the Bombay regiment of Europeans was raised to defend it. In 1668
  the island was granted to the Company, and the regiment at the same
  time transferred to them. In 1708 Bombay became a presidency, but it
  did not play so important a part as the others in the early extension
  of British power, and its forces were not so rapidly developed. It is
  said, however, to have been the first to discipline native troops, and
  Bombay sepoys were sent to Madras in 1747, and took part in the battle
  of Plassey in 1757. In 1772 the Bombay army consisted of 2500
  Europeans and 3500 sepoys, but in 1794, in consequence of the
  struggles with the Mahratta power, the native troops had been
  increased to 24,000.

  73. _Consolidation of the Army._--In 1796 a general reorganization
  took place. Hitherto the officers in each presidency had been borne on
  general "lists," according to branches of the service. These lists
  were now broken up and cadres of regiments formed. The colonels and
  lieutenant-colonels remained on separate lists, and an establishment
  of general officers was created, while the divisional commands were
  distributed between the royal and Company's officers. Further
  augmentations took place, consequent on the great extension of British
  supremacy. In 1798 the native infantry in India numbered 122
  battalions. In 1808 the total force in India amounted to 24,500
  Europeans and 154,500 natives.

  The first half of the 19th century was filled with wars and
  annexations and the army was steadily increased. Horse artillery was
  formed, and the artillery in general greatly augmented. "Irregular
  cavalry" was raised in Bengal and Bombay, and recruited from a better
  class of troopers, who received high pay and found their own horses
  and equipment. "Local forces" were raised in various parts from time
  to time, the most important being the Punjab irregular force (raised
  after the annexation of the Punjab in 1849), consisting of 3 field
  batteries, 5 regiments of cavalry, and 5 of infantry, and the Nagpur
  and Oudh irregular forces. Another kind of force, which had been
  gradually formed, was that called "contingents"--troops raised by the
  protected native states. The strongest of these was that of Hyderabad,
  originally known as the nizam's army. Changes were also made in the
  organization of the army. Sanitary improvements were effected,
  manufacturing establishments instituted or increased, and the
  administration generally improved.

  74. _The Army before the Mutiny._--The officering and recruiting of
  the three armies were in all essentials similar. The officers were
  mainly supplied by the Company's military college at Addiscombe in
  Surrey (established in 1809), and by direct appointments. The Bengal
  army was recruited from Hindustan, the infantry being mostly drawn
  from Oudh and the great Gangetic plains. The soldiers were chiefly
  high-caste Hindus, a sixth being Mahommedans. The cavalry was composed
  mainly of Mahommedans, recruited from Rohilkhand and the Gangetic
  Doab. The only other elements in the army were four Gurkha regiments,
  enlisted from Nepal, and the local Punjab irregular force. The Madras
  army was chiefly recruited from that presidency, or the native states
  connected with it, and consisted of Mahommedans, Brahmans, and of the
  Mahratta, Tamil and Telugu peoples. The Bombay army was recruited from
  its own presidency, with some Hindustanis, but chiefly formed of
  Mahrattas and Mahommedans; the Bombay light cavalry mainly from
  Hindustan proper.

  Including the local and irregular troops (about 100,000 strong), the
  total strength amounted to 38,000 Europeans of all arms, with 276
  field guns, and 348,000 native troops, with 248 field guns,--truly a
  magnificent establishment, and, outwardly, worthy of the great empire
  which England had created for herself in the East, but inwardly
  unsound, and on the very verge of the great mutiny of 1857.

  In 1856 the establishment in the several presidencies was a follows:--

    +-------------------------------+---------+---------+---------+-------+
    |                               | Bengal. | Madras. | Bombay. | Total.|
    +-------------------------------+---------+---------+---------+-------+
    | British Cavalry Regiments     |    2    |    1    |    1    |    4  |
    | British Infantry Battalions   |   15    |    3    |    4    |   22  |
    | Company's European Battalions |    3    |    3    |    3    |    9  |
    | European and Native Artillery |         |         |         |       |
    |   Battalions                  |   12    |    7    |    5    |   24  |
    | Native Infantry Battalions    |   74    |   52    |   29    |  155  |
    | Native Cavalry Regiments      |   28    |    8    |    3    |   39  |
    +-------------------------------+---------+---------+---------+-------+

  An account of the events of 1857-58 will be found under INDIAN MUTINY.
  After the catastrophe the reorganization of the military forces on
  different lines was of course unavoidable. Fortunately, the armies of
  Madras and Bombay had been almost wholly untouched by the spirit of
  disaffection, and in the darkest days the Sikhs, though formerly
  enemies of the British, had not only remained faithful to them, but
  had rendered them powerful assistance.

  75. _The Reorganization._--By the autumn of 1858 the mutiny was
  virtually crushed, and the task of reorganization commenced. On the
  1st of September 1858 the East India Company ceased to rule, and Her
  Majesty's government took up the reins of power. On the important
  question of the army, the opinions and advice of the most
  distinguished soldiers and civilians were invited. Masses of reports
  and evidence were collected in India, and by a royal commission in
  England. On the report of this commission the new system was based.
  The local European army was abolished, and its personnel amalgamated
  with the royal army. The artillery became wholly British, with the
  exception of a few native mountain batteries. The total strength of
  the British troops, all of the royal army, was largely increased,
  while that of the native troops was largely diminished. Three distinct
  native armies--those of Bengal, Madras and Bombay--were still
  maintained. The reduced Indian armies consisted of cavalry and
  infantry only, with a very few artillery, distributed as follows:--

                    Battalions  Regiments
                     Infantry.   Cavalry.
    Bengal              49         19
    Madras              40          4
    Bombay              30          7
    Punjab Force        12          6
                       ---        ---
        Total          131         36

  There were also three sapper battalions, one to each army.

  The Punjab force, which had 5 batteries of native artillery attached
  to it, continued under the Punjab government. In addition, the
  Hyderabad contingent of 4 cavalry, 6 infantry regiments and 4
  batteries, and a local force in central India of 2 regiments cavalry
  and 6 infantry, were retained under the government of India. After all
  the arrangements had been completed the army of India consisted of
  62,000 British and 125,000 native troops.

  76. _The Modern Army._--The college at Addiscombe was closed in 1860,
  and the direct appointment of British officers to the Indian local
  forces ceased in 1861. In that year a staff corps was formed by royal
  warrant in each presidency "to supply a body of officers for service
  in India, by whom various offices and appointments hitherto held by
  officers borne on the strength of the several corps in the Indian
  forces shall in future be held." Special roles were laid down. The
  corps was at first recruited partly from officers of the Company's
  service and partly from the royal army, holding staff appointments
  (the new regimental employment being considered as staff duty) and all
  kinds of political and civil posts; for the system established later
  see INDIA: _Army_. The native artillery and sappers and miners were to
  be officered from the Royal Artillery and Royal Engineers. The only
  English warrant and non-commissioned officers now to be employed in
  the native army were to be those of the Royal Engineers with the
  sappers and miners.

  A radical change in the regimental organization of all the native
  armies was effected in 1863. The Punjab Frontier Force was from the
  first organized on the irregular system, which was there seen at its
  best, as also were the new regiments raised during the Mutiny. This
  system was now applied to the whole army, each regiment and battalion
  having seven British officers attached to it for command and
  administrative duties, the immediate command of troops and companies
  being left to the native officers. Thus was the system reverted to,
  which was initiated by Clive, of a few British officers only being
  attached to each corps for the higher regimental duties of command and
  control. Time had shown that this was more effective than the regular
  system instituted in 1796 of British officers commanding troops and
  companies.

  A new spirit was breathed into the army. The supremacy of the
  commandant was the main principle. He was less hampered by the
  unbending regulations enjoined upon the old regular regiments, had
  greater powers of reward and punishment, was in a position to assume
  larger responsibility and greater freedom of action, and was supported
  in the full exercise of his authority. The system made the officers.

  Up to 1881 the native army underwent little change, but in that year
  18 regiments of infantry and 4 of cavalry were broken up, almost the
  same total number of men being maintained in fewer and stronger
  regiments. The only reduction made in the British troops was in the
  Royal Artillery, which was diminished by 11 batteries. The events of
  1885, however, on the Russo-Afghan frontier, led to augmentations. The
  11 batteries Royal Artillery were brought back from England; each of
  the 9 British cavalry regiments in India received a fourth squadron;
  each of the British infantry battalions was increased by 100 men, and
  3 battalions were added. The native cavalry had a fourth squadron
  added to each regiment; three of the four regiments broken up in 1881
  were re-raised, while the native infantry was increased in regimental
  strength, and 9 new battalions raised composed of Gurkhas, Sikhs and
  Punjabis. The addition in all amounted to 10,600 British and 21,200
  native troops. In 1890 the strength of the army of India was 73,000
  British and, including irregulars, 147,500 native troops. For the
  Indian volunteers, see VOLUNTEERS.

  Many important changes took place between 1885 and 1904. Seven Madras
  infantry regiments were converted into regiments for service in Burma,
  composed of Gurkhas and hardy races from northern India; six Bengal
  and Bombay regiments were similarly converted into regiments of
  Punjabis, Pathans and Gurkhas; the native mountain batteries have been
  increased to ten; a system of linked battalions has been introduced
  with the formation of regimental centres for mobilization; and
  reserves for infantry and mountain artillery have been formed. The
  number of British officers with each regiment has been increased to
  nine, and the two wing commands in battalions have been converted into
  4 double-company commands of 250 men each, under a British commander,
  who is responsible to the commandant for their training and
  efficiency, the command of the companies being left to the native
  officers. This system, which is analogous to the squadron command in
  the cavalry, admits of closer individual attention to training, and
  distributes among the senior British regimental officers effective
  responsibility of a personal kind.

  An addition (at the imperial expense) of five battalions of Sikhs,
  Punjabi Mahommedans, Jats and hillmen in northern India was made in
  1900, as the result of India being called upon to furnish garrisons
  for Mauritius and other stations overseas.

  The unification of the triplicate army departments in the different
  presidential armies was completed in 1891, all being brought directly
  under the supreme government; and the three separate staff corps of
  Bengal, Madras and Bombay were fused into one in 1891 as the Indian
  Staff Corps. The term "Indian Staff Corps" was in turn replaced by
  that of "Indian Army" in 1903. These measures prepared the way for the
  new system of army organization which, by authority of parliament,
  abolished divided control and placed the whole army of India under the
  governor-general and the commander-in-chief in India.

CANADIAN FORCES

  77. In the earliest European settlements in Canada, the necessity of
  protection against Indians caused the formation of a militia, and in
  1665 companies were raised in every parish. The military history of
  the Canadian forces under French rule is full of incident, and they
  served not only against Indian raiders but also against the troops of
  Great Britain and of her North American colonies. Six militia
  battalions took part in the defence of Quebec in 1759, and even the
  transfer of Canada from the French to the British crown did not cause
  the disbandment of the existing forces. The French Canadians
  distinguished themselves not less than the British settlers in the War
  of American Independence, and in particular in the defence of Quebec
  against Montgomery and Arnold. In 1787 an ordinance was made whereby
  three battalions of the militia were permanently embodied, each
  contingent serving for two years, at the end of which time a fresh
  contingent relieved it, and after this a succession of laws and
  regulations were made with a view to complete organization of the
  force. The brunt of the fighting on the American frontier in the war
  of 1812 was borne very largely by the permanent force of three
  battalions and the fresh units called out, all these being militia
  corps. Up to 1828 a distinction had been made between the British and
  the French regiments: this was then abolished. The militia was again
  employed on active service during the disturbances of 1837, and the
  "Active Militia" in 1863 had grown to a strength of 25,000 men. The
  Fenian troubles of 1864 and 1866 caused the embodiment of the Canadian
  forces once more. In 1867 took place the unification of Canada, after
  which the whole force was completely organized on the basis of a
  militia act (1868). A department of Militia and Defence with a
  responsible minister was established, and the strength of the active
  militia of all arms was fixed at 40,000 rank and file. Two years later
  the militia furnished 6000 men to deal with the Fenian Raid of 1870,
  and took part in Colonel (Lord) Wolseley's Red River expedition. In
  1871 a permanent force, serving the double purpose of a regular
  nucleus and an instructional cadre, was organized in two troops of
  cavalry, two batteries of artillery and one regiment of infantry, and
  in 1876 the Royal Military College of Canada was founded at Kingston.
  In 1885 the Riel rebellion was dealt with, and the important action of
  Batoche won, by the militia, without assistance from regular troops.
  In the same year Canada contributed a force of _voyageurs_ to the Nile
  expedition of Lord Wolseley; the experience of these men was
  admittedly of great assistance in navigating the Rapids. The militia
  sent contingents of all arms to serve in the South African War,
  1899-1902, including "Strathcona's Horse," a special corps, recruited
  almost entirely from the Active Militia and the North-west Mounted
  Police. The latter, a permanent constabulary of mounted riflemen, was
  formed in 1873.

  After the South African War an extensive scheme of reorganization was
  taken in hand, the command being exercised for two years (1902-1904)
  by Major-General Lord Dundonald, and subsequently by a militia council
  (Militia Act 1904), similar in constitution to the home Army Council.
  For details of the present military strength of Canada, see the
  article CANADA.

AUSTRIAN ARMY

78. The _Landsknecht_ infantry constituted the mainstay of the imperial
armies in the 16th century. Maximilian I. and Charles V. are recorded to
have marched and carried the "long pike" in their ranks. Maximilian also
formed a corps of _Kyrisser_, who were the origin of the modern
cuirassiers. It was not, however, until much later that the Austrian
army came into existence as a permanent force. Rudolph II. formed a
small standing force about 1600, but relied upon the "enlistment"
system, like other sovereigns of the time, for the bulk of his armies.
The Thirty Years' War produced the permanence of service which led in
all the states of Europe to the rise of standing armies. In the Empire
it was Wallenstein who first raised a distinctly imperial army of
soldiers owing no duty but to the sovereign; and it was the suspicion
that he intended to use this army, which was raised largely at his own
expense, to further his own ends, that led to his assassination. From
that time the regiments belonged no longer to their colonels, but to the
emperor; and the oldest regiments in the present Austrian army date from
the Thirty Years' War, at the close of which Austria had 19 infantry, 6
cuirassier and 1 dragoon regiments. The almost continuous wars of
Austria against France and the Turks (from 1495 to 1895 Austrian troops
took part in 7000 actions of all sorts) led to a continuous increase in
her establishments. The wars of the time of Montecucculi and of Eugene
were followed by that of the Polish Succession, the two Turkish wars,
and the three great struggles against Frederick the Great. Thus in 1763
the army had been almost continuously on active service for more than
100 years, in the course of which its organization had been modified in
accordance with the lessons of each war. This, in conjunction with the
fact that Austria took part in other Turkish campaigns subsequently,
rendered this army the most formidable opponent of the forces of the
French Revolution (1792). But the superior leading, organization and
numbers of the emperor's forces were totally inadequate to the magnitude
of the task of suppressing the Revolutionary forces, and though such
victories as Neerwinden were sufficient proof of the efficiency and
valour of the Austrians, they made no headway. In later campaigns, in
which the enemy had acquired war experience, and the best of their
officers had come to the front, the tide turned against the Imperialists
even on the field of battle. The archduke Charles's victories of 1796
were more than counterbalanced by Bonaparte's Italian campaign, and the
temporary success of 1799 ended at Marengo and Hohenlinden.

79. The Austrians, during the short peace which preceded the war of
1805, suffered, in consequence of all this, from a feeling of distrust,
not merely in their leaders, but also in the whole system upon which the
army was raised, organized and trained. This was substantially the same
as that of the Seven Years' War time. Enlistment being voluntary and for
long service, the numbers necessary to cope with the output of the
French conscription could not be raised, and the inner history of the
Austrian headquarters in the Ulm campaign shows that the dissensions and
mutual distrust of the general officers had gone far towards the
disintegration of an army which at that time had the most _esprit de
corps_ and the highest military qualities of any army in Europe. But the
disasters of 1805 swept away good and bad alike in the abolition of the
old system. Already the archduke Charles had designed a "nation in arms"
after the French model, and on this basis the reconstruction was begun.
The conscription was put in force and the necessary numbers thus
obtained; the administration was at the same time reformed and the
organization and supply services brought into line with modern
requirements. The war of 1809 surprised Austria in the midst of her
reorganization, yet the new army fought with the greatest spirit. The
invasion of Bavaria was by no means so leisurely as it had been in 1805,
and the archduke Charles obtained one signal victory over Napoleon in
person. Aspern and Wagram were most desperately contested, and though
the archduke ceased to take part in the administration after 1809 the
work went on steadily until, in 1813, the Austrian armies worthily
represented the combination of discipline with the "nation in arms"
principle. Their intervention in the War of Liberation was decisive, and
Austria, in spite of her territorial losses of the past years, put into
the field well-drilled armies far exceeding in numbers those which had
appeared in the wars of the Revolution. After the fall of Napoleon,
Austria's hold on Italy necessitated the maintenance of a large army of
occupation. This army, and in particular its cavalry, was admittedly the
best in Europe, and, having to be ready to march at a few days' notice,
it was saved from the deadening influence of undisturbed peace which
affected every other service in Europe from 1815 to 1850.

80. The Austrian system has conserved much of the peculiar tone of the
army of 1848, of which English readers may obtain a good idea from
George Meredith's _Vittoria_. It was, however, a natural result of this
that the army lost to some considerable extent the spirit of the "nation
in arms" of 1809 and 1813. It was employed in dynastic wars, and the
conscription was of course modified by substitution; thus, when the war
of 1859 resulted unfavourably to the Austrians, the army began to lose
confidence, precisely as had been the case in 1805. Once more, in 1866,
an army animated by the purely professional spirit, which was itself
weakened by distrust, met a "nation in arms," and in this case a nation
well trained in peace and armed with a breechloader. Bad staff work, and
tactics which can only be described as those of pique, precipitated the
disaster, and in seven weeks the victorious Prussians were almost at the
gates of Vienna.

The result of the war, and of the constitutional changes about this
time, was the re-adoption of the principles of 1806-1813, the abolition
of conscription and long service in favour of universal service for a
short term, and a thorough reform in the methods of command and staff
work. It has been said of the Prussian army that "discipline is--the
officers." This is more true of the "K.K." army[1] than of any other in
Europe; the great bond of union between the heterogeneous levies of
recruits of many races is the spirit of the corps of officers, which
retains the personal and professional characteristics of the old army of
Italy.

FRENCH ARMY

81. The French army (see for further details FRANCE: _Law and
Institutions_) dates from the middle of the 15th century, at which time
Charles VII. formed, from mercenaries who had served him in the Hundred
Years' War, the _compagnies d'ordonnance_, and thus laid the foundation
of a national standing army. But the armies that followed the kings in
their wars still consisted mainly of mercenaries, hired for the
occasion; and the work of Charles and his successors was completely
undone in the confusion of the religious wars. Louvois, who was minister
of Louis XIV., was the true creator of the French royal army. The
organization of the first standing army is here given in some detail, as
it served as a model for all armies for more than a century, and is also
followed to some extent in our own times. Before the advent of Louvois,
the forces were royal only in name. The army was a fortuitous concourse
of regiments of horse and foot, each of which was the property of its
colonel. The companies similarly belonged to their captains, and, the
state being then in no condition to buy out these vested interests,
superior control was almost illusory. Indeed, all the well-known devices
for eluding such control, for instance, showing imaginary men on the pay
lists, can be traced to the French army of the 16th century. A further
difficulty lay in the existence of the offices called Colonel-General,
Marshal-General and Grand Master of Artillery, between whom no common
administration was possible. The grand master survived until 1743, but
Louvois managed to suppress the other offices, and even to put one of
his own subordinates into the office of grand master. Thus was assured
direct royal control, exercised through the war minister. Louvois was
unable indeed to overthrow the proprietary system, but he made stringent
regulations against abuses, and confined it to the colonels (_mestre de
camp_ in the cavalry) and the captains. Henceforward the colonel was a
wealthy noble, with few duties beyond that of spending money freely and
of exercising his court influence on behalf of his regiment. The real
work of the service was done by the lieutenant-colonels and lieutenants,
and the king and the minister recognized this on all occasions. Thus
Vauban was given, as a reward for good service, a company in the
"Picardie" regiment without purchase. Promotions from the ranks were
very rare but not unknown, and all promotions were awarded according to
merit except those to captain or colonel. One of the captains in a
regiment was styled major, and acted as adjutant. This post was of
course filled by selection and not by purchase. The grades of general
officers were newly fixed by Louvois--the _brigadier, maréchal de camp_,
lieutenant-general and marshal of France. The general principle was to
give command, but not promotion, according to merit. The rank and file
were recruited by voluntary enlistment for four years' service. The
infantry company was maintained in peace at an effective of 60, except
in the guards and the numerous foreign corps, in which the company was
always at the war strength of 100 to 200 men. This arm was composed, in
1678, of the _Gardes françaises_, the Swiss guards, the old (_vieux_ and
_petits vieux_) regiments of the line, of which the senior, "Picardie,"
claimed to be the oldest regiment in Europe, and the regiments raised
under the new system. The _régiment du roi_, which was deliberately made
the model of all others and was commanded by the celebrated Martinet,
was the senior of these latter. The whole infantry arm in 1678 numbered
320,000 field and garrison troops. The cavalry consisted of the _Maison
du Roi_ (which Louvois converted from a "show" corps to one of the
highest discipline and valour), divided into the _Gardes du Corps_ and
the _Mousquetaires_, the _Gendarmerie_ (descended from the old feudal
cavalry and the _ordonnance_ companies) and the line cavalry, the whole
being about 55,000 strong. There were also 10,000 dragoons. In addition
to the regular army, the king could call out, in case of need, the
ancient _arrière-ban_ or levy, as was in fact done in 1674. On that
occasion, however, it behaved badly, and it was not again employed. In
1688 Louvois organized a militia raised by ballot. This numbered 25,000
men and proved to be better, at any rate, than the _arrière-ban_. Many
infantry regiments of the line were, as has been said, foreign, and in
1678 the foreigners numbered 30,000, the greater part of these being
Swiss.

82. The artillery had been an industrial concern rather than an arm of
the service. In sieges a sum of money was paid for each piece put in
battery, and the grand master was not subordinated to the war office. A
nominee of Louvois, as has been said, filled the post at this time, and
eventually Louvois formed companies of artillerymen, and finally the
regiment of "Fusiliers" which Vauban described as the "finest regiment
in the world." The engineer service, as organized by Vauban, was
composed of engineers "in ordinary," and of line officers especially
employed in war. Louvois further introduced the system of magazines. To
ensure the regular working of supply and transport, he instituted direct
control by the central executive, and stored great quantities of food in
the fortresses, thereby securing for the French armies a precision and
certainty in military operations which had hitherto been wanting. The
higher administration of the army, under the minister of war, fell into
two branches, that of the commissaries and that of the inspecting
officers. The duties of the former resembled those of a modern "routine"
staff--issue of equipment, checking of returns, &c. The latter exercised
functions analogous to those of a general staff, supervising the
training and general efficiency of the troops. Louvois also created an
excellent hospital service, mobile and stationary, founded the Hôtel des
Invalides in Paris for the maintenance of old soldiers, established
cadet schools for the training of young officers, and stimulated bravery
and good conduct by reviving and creating military orders of merit.

83. The last half of the 17th century is a brilliant period in the
annals of the French armies. Thoroughly organized, animated by the
presence of the king, and led by such generals as Condé, Turenne,
Luxembourg, Catinat and Vendôme, they made head against coalitions which
embraced nearly all the powers of Europe, and made France the first
military nation of Europe. The reverses of the later part of Louis
XIV.'s reign were not of course without result upon the tone of the
French army, and the campaigns of Marlborough and Eugene for a time
diminished the repute in which the troops of Louis were held by other
powers. Nevertheless the War of the Spanish Succession closed with
French victories, and generals of the calibre of Villars and Berwick
were not to be found in the service of every prince. The war of the
Polish Succession in Germany and Italy reflected no discredit upon the
French arms; and the German general staff, in its history of the wars of
Frederick the Great, states that "in 1740 the French army was still
regarded as the first in Europe." Since the death of Louvois very little
had changed. The army was still governed as it had been by the great war
minister, and something had been done to reduce evils against which even
he had been powerless. A royal regiment of artillery had come into
existence, and the engineers were justly regarded as the most skilful in
Europe. Certain alterations had been made in the organization of both
the guard and the line, and the total strength of the French in peace
was somewhat less than 200,000. Relatively to the numbers maintained in
other states, it was thus as powerful as before. Indeed, only one
feature of importance differentiated the French army from its
contemporaries--the proportion of officers to men, which was one to
eleven. In view of this, the spirit of the army was necessarily that of
its officers, and these were by no means the equals of their
predecessors of the time of Turenne or Luxembourg. Louvois' principle of
employing professional soldiers for command and wealthy men for
colonelcies and captaincies was not deliberately adopted, but inevitably
grew out of the circumstances of the time. The system answered fairly
whilst continual wars gave the professional soldiers opportunities for
distinction and advancement. But in a long peace the captains of
eighteen and colonels of twenty-three blocked all promotion, and there
was no work save that of routine to be done. Under these conditions the
best soldiers sought service in other countries, the remainder lived
only for pleasure, whilst the titular chiefs of regiments and companies
rarely appeared on parade. Madame de Genlis relates how, when young
courtiers departed to join their regiments for a few weeks' duty, the
ladies of the court decked them with favours, as if proceeding on a
distant and perilous expedition.

On the other hand, the fact that the French armies required large drafts
of militia to bring up their regular forces to war strength gave them a
vitality which was unusual in armies of the time. Even in the time of
Louis XIV. the military spirit of the country had arisen at the threat
of invasion, and the French armies of 1709 fought far more desperately,
as the casualty lists of the allies at Malplaquet showed, than those of
1703 or 1704. In the time of the Revolution the national spirit of the
French army formed a rallying-point for the forces of order, whereas
Prussia, whose army was completely independent of the people, lost all
power of defending herself after a defeat in the field. It is difficult
to summarize the conduct of the royal armies in the wars of 1740-63.
With a few exceptions the superior leaders proved themselves
incompetent, and in three great battles, at least, the troops suffered
ignominious defeat (Dettingen 1743, Rossbach 1757, Minden 1759). On the
other hand, Marshal Saxe and others of the younger generals were
excellent commanders, and Fontenoy was a victory of the first magnitude.
The administration, however, was corrupt and inefficient, and the
general reputation of the French armies fell so low that Frederick the
Great once refused an important command to one of his generals on the
ground that his experience had been gained only against French troops.

Under Louis XVI. things improved somewhat; the American War and the
successes of Lafayette and Rochambeau revived a more warlike spirit.
Instruction was more carefully attended to, and a good system of drill
and tactics was elaborated at the camp of St Omer. Attempts were made to
reform the administration. Artillery and engineer schools had come into
existence, and the intellectual activity of the best officers was
remarkable (see Max Jähns, _Gesch. der Kriegswissenschaften_, vol. iii.
passim). But the Revolution soon broke over France, and the history of
the royal army was henceforward carried on by that revolutionary army,
which, under a new flag, was destined to raise the military fame of
France to its greatest height.

84. If Louis was the creator of the royal army, Carnot was so of the
revolutionary army. At the outbreak of the Revolution the royal army
consisted of 224 infantry battalions, 7 regiments of artillery, and 62
regiments of cavalry, numbering about 173,000 in all, but capable of
augmentation on war strength to 210,000. To this might be added about
60,000 militia (see Chuquet, _Première invasion prussienne_).

The first step of the Constituent Assembly was the abrogation of an
edict of 1781 whereby men of non-noble birth had been denied
commissioned rank (1790). Thus, when many of the officers emigrated
along with their fellows of the _noblesse_, trained non-commissioned
officers, who would already have been officers save for this edict, were
available to fill their places. The general scheme of reform (see
CONSCRIPTION) was less satisfactory, but the formation of a National
Guard, comprising in theory the whole military population, was a step of
the highest importance. At this time the titles of regiments were
abandoned in favour of numbers, and the costly and dangerous _Maison du
Roi_ abolished. But voluntary enlistment soon failed; the old corps,
which kept up their discipline, were depleted, and the men went to the
volunteers, where work was less exacting and promotion more rapid.
_"Aussi fut-on,"_ says a French writer, _"réduit bientôt à forcer
l'engagement volontaire et à imposer le choix du corps."_ The "first
invasion" (July 1792) put an end to half-measures, and the country was
declared "in danger." Even these measures, however, were purely designed
to meet the emergency, and, after Valmy, enthusiasm waned to such a
degree that, of a paper strength of 800,000 men (December 1792), only
112,000 of the line and 290,000 volunteers were actually present. The
disasters of the following spring once more called for extreme energy,
and 300,000 national guards were sent to the line, a step which was
followed by a compulsory _levée en masse_; one million men were thus
assembled to deal with the manifold dangers of civil and foreign war.
France was saved by mere numbers and the driving energy of the
Terrorists, not by discipline and organization. The latter was chaotic,
and almost every element of success was wanting to the tumultuary levies
of the year 1793 save a ferocious energy born of liberty and the
guillotine. But under the Terrorist régime the army became the
rallying-point of the nation, and when Lazare Carnot (q.v.) became
minister of war a better organization and discipline began to appear.
The amalgamation of the old army and the volunteers, which had been
commenced but imperfectly carried out, was effected on a different and
more thorough principle. The infantry was organized in demi-brigades of
three battalions (usually one of the old army to two of volunteers). A
permanent organization in divisions of all arms was introduced, and the
ablest officers selected for the commands. Arsenals and manufactories of
warlike stores were created, schools of instruction were re-established;
the republican forces were transformed from hordes to armies, well
disciplined, organized and equipped. Later measures followed the same
lines, and the artillery and engineers, which in 1790 were admittedly
the best in Europe and which owing to the _roturier_ element in their
officer cadres had not been disorganized by the emigration, steadily
improved. The infantry, and in a less degree the cavalry, became good
and trustworthy soldiers, and the glorious campaigns of 1794, 1795 and
1796, which were the direct result of Carnot's administration, bore
witness to the potentialities of the essentially modern system. But,
great as was the triumph of 1796-97, the exhaustion of years of
continuous warfare had made itself felt: the armies were reduced to mere
skeletons, and no sufficient means existed of replenishing them, till in
1798 the _conscription_ was introduced. From that time the whole male
population of France was practically at her ruler's disposal; and
Napoleon had full scope for his genius in organizing these masses. His
principal improvements were effected in the interval between the peace
of Amiens and the war with the third coalition, while threatening the
invasion of England. His armies were collected in large camps on the
coasts of the Channel, and there received that organization which, with
minor variations, they retained during all his campaigns, and which has
since been copied by all European nations. The divisions had already
given place to the army corps, and Napoleon completed the work of his
predecessors. He withdrew the whole of the cavalry and a portion of the
artillery from the divisions, and thus formed "corps troops" and cavalry
and artillery reserves for the whole army. The grade of marshal of
France was revived at Napoleon's coronation. At the same time, the
operation of Jourdan's law, acquiesced in during times of national
danger and even during peace, soon found opposition when the conscripts
realized that long foreign wars were to be their lot. It was not the
actual losses of the field armies, great as these undoubtedly were,
which led Napoleon in the full tide of his career to adopt the fatal
practice of "anticipating" the conscription, but the steady increase in
the number of _réfractaires_, men who refused to come up for service. To
hunt these men down, no less than forty thousand picked soldiers were
engaged within the borders of France, and the actual French element in
the armies of Napoleon grew less and less with every extension of the
empire. Thus, in the Grand Army of 1809, about one-third of the corps of
all arms were purely German, and in 1812 the army which invaded Russia,
467,000 strong, included 280,000 foreigners. In other words, the million
of men produced by the original conscription of 1793 had dwindled to
about half that number (counting the various subsidiary armies in Spain,
&c.), and one hundred thousand of the best and sturdiest Frenchmen were
engaged in a sort of civil war in France itself. The conscription was
"anticipated" even in 1806, the conscripts for 1807 being called up
before their time. As the later wars of the Empire closed one by one the
foreign sources of recruiting, the conscription became more terrible
every year, with the result that more _réfractaires_ and more trusted
soldiers to hunt them down were kept in non-effective employment.
Finally the capacity for resistance was exhausted, and the army, from
the marshals downward, showed that it had had enough.

85. One of the first acts of the Restoration was to abolish the
conscription, but it had again to be resorted to within three years. In
1818 the annual contingent was fixed at 40,000, and the period of
service at six years; in 1824 the contingent was increased to 60,000,
and in 1832 to 80,000. Of this, however, a part only, according to the
requirements of the service, were enrolled; the remainder were sent home
on leave or furlough. Up to 1855 certain exemptions were authorized, and
substitution or exchange of lots amongst young men who had drawn was
permitted, but the individual drawn was obliged either to serve
personally or find a substitute. The long series of Algerian wars
produced further changes, and in 1855 the law of "dotation" or exemption
by payment was passed, and put an end to personal substitution. The
state now undertook to provide substitutes for all who paid a fixed sum,
and did so by high bounties to volunteers or to soldiers for
re-engaging. Although the price of exemption was fixed as high as £92,
on an average 23,000 were claimed annually, and in 1859 as many as
42,000 were granted. Thus gradually the conscription became rather
subsidiary to voluntary enlistment, and in 1866, out of a total
establishment of 400,000, only 120,000 were conscripts. Changes had also
taken place in the constitution of the army. On the Restoration its
numbers were reduced to 150,000, the old regiments broken up and recast,
and a royal guard created in place of the old imperial one. When the
revolution of July 1830 had driven Charles X. from his throne, the royal
guard, which had made itself peculiarly obnoxious, was dissolved; and
during Louis Philippe's reign the army was augmented to about 240,000
with the colours. Under the Provisional Government of 1848 it was
further increased, and in 1854, when France allied herself with England
against Russia, the army was raised to 500,000 men. The imperial guard
was re-created, and every effort made to revive the old Napoleonic
traditions in the army. In 1859 Napoleon III. took the field as the
champion and ally of Italy, and the victories of Montebello, Magenta and
Solferino raised the reputation of the army to the highest pitch, and
for a time made France the arbiter of Europe. But the campaign of 1866
suddenly made the world aware that a rival military power had arisen,
which was prepared to dispute that supremacy.

Marshal Niel (q.v.), the then war minister, saw clearly that the
organization which had with difficulty maintained 150,000 men in Italy,
was no match for that which had within a month thrown 250,000 into the
very heart of Austria, while waging a successful war on the Main against
Bavaria and her allies. In 1867, therefore, he brought forward a measure
for the reorganization of the army. This was to have been a true "nation
in arms" based on universal service, and Niel calculated upon producing
a first-line army 800,000 strong--half with the colours, half in
reserve--with a separate army of the second line. But many years must
elapse before the full effect of this principle of recruiting can be
produced, as the army is incomplete in some degree until the oldest
reservist is a man who has been through the line training. Niel himself
died within a year, and 1870 witnessed the complete ruin of the French
army. The law of 1868 remained therefore no more than an expression of
principle.

86. At the outbreak of the Franco-German War (q.v.) the French field
troops consisted of 368 battalions, 252 squadrons, and 984 guns. The
strength of the entire army on peace footing was 393,000 men; on war
footing, 567,000. Disasters followed one another in rapid succession,
and the bulk of this war-trained long-service army was captive in
Germany within three months of the opening battle. But the spirit of the
nation rose to the occasion as it had done in 1793. The next year's
contingent of recruits was called out and hastily trained. Fourth
battalions were formed from the depot cadres, and organized into
_régiments de marche_. The _gardes mobiles_ (Niel's creation) were
mobilized, and by successive decrees and under various names nearly all
the manhood of the country called to arms.

The regular troops raised as _régiments de marche_, &c., amounted to
213,000 infantry, 12,000 cavalry and 10,000 artillery. The _garde
mobile_ exceeded 300,000, and the mobilized national guard exceeded
1,100,000--of whom about 180,000 were actually in the field and 250,000
in Paris; the remainder preparing themselves in camps or depots for
active work. Altogether the new formations amounted to nearly 1,700,000.
Though, in the face of the now war-experienced well-led and disciplined
Germans, their efforts failed, this cannot detract from the admiration
which must be felt by every soldier for the patriotism of the people and
the creative energy of their leaders, of whom Gambetta and Freycinet
were the chief. After the war every Frenchman set himself to solve the
army problem not less seriously than had every Prussian after Jena, and
the reformed French army (see FRANCE) was the product of the period of
national reconstruction. The adoption of the "universal service"
principle of active army, reserves and second-line troops, the essential
feature of which is the _line_ training of every man, was almost as a
matter of course the basis of the reorganization, for the want of a
trained reserve was the most obvious cause of the disasters of "the
terrible year."

GERMAN ARMY

87. The German army, strictly speaking, dates only from 1871, or at
earliest 1866. Before the unification of the German empire or
confederation, the several states possessed distinct armies, federal
armies when required being formed from the contingents which the members
of the union, like those of an ordinary alliance, engaged to furnish.
The armies of the Holy Roman Empire were similarly formed from "single,"
"double," or "treble" contingents under the supreme command of specially
appointed field marshals of the Empire. In the troubles of 1848 there
was witnessed the curious spectacle of half of a victorious army being
unable to pursue the enemy; this, being composed of "Prussian" as
distinct from "federal contingent" troops, had to stop at the frontier
of another state. The events of 1866 and 1870 put an end to all this,
and to a very great extent to the separate armies of the old
confederation, all being now remodelled on Prussian lines. The Prussian
army therefore is at once the most important and historically the most
interesting of the forces of the German empire. Its _début_ (about 1630)
was not satisfactory, and in the Thirty Years' War troops of Sweden, of
the Emperor, of the League, &c., plundered Brandenburg unharmed. The
elector, when appealed to for protection, could but answer, "Que faire?
Ils ont des canons." The humiliations of this time, were, however,
avenged by the troops of the next ruler of Brandenburg, called the Great
Elector. The supposed invincibility of the Swedes did not prevent him
from inflicting upon them a severe defeat at Fehrbellin, and thereafter
the Prussian contingents which took part in the many European wars of
the time acquitted themselves creditably. One of their generals was the
famous Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau, and the reckless gallantry of this
leader was conspicuous on many fields, from Blenheim to Malplaquet. But
Leopold's greatest work was done in the years of peace (1715-40), during
which Prussia was preparing the army with which Frederick the Great won
his battles. He had introduced (about 1700) iron ramrods into the
infantry service, and for over twenty years the Prussian infantry was
drilled to a perfection which gave it a superiority of five to three
over the best-drilled troops of the Austrian service, and still greater
predominance over the French, which was then accounted the best in
Europe. Frederick William I., king of Prussia, directed and supervised
the creation of the new Prussian army, and Leopold was his principal
assistant. In organization and methods of recruiting, as well as in
tactical efficiency, the army of 1740 was equally pre-eminent. Then came
the wars of Frederick the Great. It is not too much to say that the
infantry won his earlier battles; the cavalry had been neglected both by
Frederick William and by Leopold, and Frederick wrote that "it was not
worth the devil's while to fetch it away." But the predominance of the
infantry was so far indisputable that Frederick was able to devote
himself to the reorganization of the mounted arm, with results which
appeared in the splendid victories of Hohenfriedberg, Rossbach, Leuthen
and Zorndorf. But long before the close of the Seven Years' War the
incomparable infantry of the old army had disappeared, to be replaced by
foreigners, deserters and vagabonds of all kinds, not to mention the
unwilling Saxon and other recruits forced into the king's service. The
army of 200,000 men which Frederick bequeathed to his successor was
indeed superb, and deserved to be the model of Europe. But with
Frederick's death the genius which had animated it, and which alone gave
value to such heterogeneous materials, was gone. The long peace had the
customary effect of sapping the efficiency of the long-service troops.
They still retained their imposing appearance and precision of movement,
and overweening self-confidence. But in 1806, after two crushing defeats
and a series of humiliating surrenders, Prussia found herself at the
feet of the conqueror, shorn of half her territory, obliged to receive
French troops in all her towns and fortresses, and only existing on
sufferance. But in these very disasters were laid the seeds of her
future greatness. By the treaty of Tilsit the Prussian army was limited
to 43,000 men. This limitation suggested to Scharnhorst "universal
service" on the _Krümper_[2] system already described (see § 36 above).

88. The bitter humiliation and suffering endured under the French yoke
aroused a national spirit which was capable of any sacrifices. The
civilian became eager to be trained to fight against the oppressor of
his country; and when Prussia rose in 1813, the armies she poured into
the field were no longer professional, but national armies, imperfectly
trained and organized, but animated by a spirit which more than
compensated for these defects. At the close of the war her rulers, with
far-seeing sagacity, at once devoted themselves to organize on a
permanent footing the system which had sprung up under the necessities
and enthusiasm of the moment. Universal compulsory service, and a three
years' term in the ranks, with further periods in the reserve and
_Landwehr_, were then introduced; and though variations have
subsequently been made in the distribution of time, the principles were
substantially the same as those now in force. By the law of 1814 the
periods of service were fixed at three years in the army, two in the
reserve and fourteen in the _Landwehr_, and the annual contingent at
40,000 men. As the population increased, it was felt that the service
was unequally distributed, pressing unnecessarily heavily on some, while
others escaped altogether. Further, the experiences of Bronnzell and
Olmütz in 1850, and of 1859, when Prussia armed in anticipation of a war
with France, aroused great doubts as to the efficiency of the
_Landwehr_, which then formed the bulk of Prussia's forces, and of whom
many had been as long as ten years away from the colours. At this time
the French remark that the Prussian army was "a sort of militia" was by
no means untrue. Accordingly, by the law of 1860 the annual contingent
was fixed at 63,000, the period in the reserve was increased from two to
four years, and that in the _Landwehr_ reduced from fourteen to five.
The total armed force thus remained nearly the same (12 contingents of
63,000, in place of 19 of 40,000), but the army and its reserves were
more than doubled (increased from 5 × 40,000 to 7 × 63,000) while the
_Landwehr_ was proportionately reduced.

This change was not effected without great opposition, and led to a
prolonged struggle between the king, guided by Bismarck, and the
parliament. It required the victories of 1866 and 1870, and the position
thereby won for Prussia, to reconcile the nation to the new law. The
military alliance (1866) of Prussia with the other German states gave
place in 1871 to the union of all the armies into the German army as it
is to-day. Some retained their old peculiarities of uniform, and even
more than this was allowed to Bavaria and to Saxony, but the whole army,
which has been increased year by year to its present strength, is
modelled on the Prussian part of it. The Prussian army corps are the
Guard, and the line numbered I. to XI., and XV. to XVIII.

89. The _Saxon Army_ formerly played a prominent part in all the wars of
northern Europe, chiefly in connexion with Poland. In the War of the
Austrian Succession the Saxon army played a prominent part, but in the
end it suffered a heavy defeat in the battle of Kesselsdorf (1745). In
the Seven Years' War Saxony was overrun by the Prussians almost without
resistance, and the military forces of the country under Field Marshal
Rutowski were forced to surrender _en masse_ at Pirna (1756); the men
were compelled by Frederick the Great to join the Prussian army, and
fought, though most unwillingly, through the remainder of the war as
Prussian soldiers. A few outlying regiments which had not been involved
in the catastrophe served with the Austrians, and on one occasion at
least, at Kolin, inflicted a severe blow on the Prussians. At the
outbreak of the wars of the French Revolution the Saxon army was over
30,000 strong. It took part in the campaign of Jena on the side of the
Prussians, and during the Napoleonic domination in Germany Saxony
furnished strong contingents to the armies of Napoleon, who in return
recognized her elector as king, and largely increased his territories.
The newly made king remained faithful to Napoleon even in his reverses;
but the army was too German in feeling to fight willingly under the
French flag. Their defection at Leipzig contributed not a little to the
results of that bloody day. After the peace the king was shorn of a
great part of his dominions, and the army was reconstituted on a smaller
scale. In 1866 Saxony sided with Austria, and her army shared in the
disasters of the brief campaign and the crowning defeat at Königgrätz.
Under the crown prince's leadership, however, the Saxons distinguished
themselves by their courage and steadiness wherever they were engaged.
After the war Saxony became part of the North German Confederation, and
in 1870-1871 her troops, under the command of the crown prince, formed
the XII. corps of the great German army. They were assigned to the II.
army of Prince Frederick Charles, and delivered the decisive attack on
the French right at Gravelotte. Subsequently a IV. army was formed under
the command of the crown prince, in which the XII. corps, now under
Prince George of Saxony, served with unvarying credit in the campaign of
Sedan and the siege of Paris. The Saxon army is now organized in every
respect on Prussian lines, and forms two army corps (XII. at Dresden and
XIX. at Leipzig) of the German army. The German emperor, in concert with
the king of Saxony, names the officers for the higher commands. Saxony
retains, however, her separate war ministry, budget, &c.; and
appointments and promotion to all but the highest commands are made by
the king. The colours of the older Saxon forces, and especially the
green of the tunics, are retained in many of the uniforms of the present
day.

  90. The _Bavarian Army_ has perhaps the most continuous record of good
  service in the field of any of the minor German armies. The oldest
  regiments date from the Thirty Years' War, in which the veteran army
  of the Catholic league, commanded by Count Tilly and formed on the
  nucleus of the Bavarian army, played a conspicuous part. Later in the
  war the Bavarian general, Count Mercy, proved himself a worthy
  opponent of Turenne and Condé. Henceforward the Bavarians were engaged
  in almost every war between France and Austria, taking part
  successively in the wars of the Grand Alliance, the Spanish Succession
  (in which they came into conflict with the English), and the Polish
  and Austrian Succession wars. In pursuance of the traditional
  anti-Austrian policy, the troops of Bavaria, led by a distinguished
  Bavarian, Marshal (Prince) Wrede, served in the campaigns of 1805 to
  1813 side by side with the French, and Napoleon made the electorate
  into a kingdom. But in 1813 Bavaria joined the Alliance, and Wrede
  tried to intercept the French on their retreat from Leipzig. Napoleon,
  however, inflicted a severe defeat on his old general at Hanau, and
  opened his road to France. In 1866 the Bavarians took part against
  Prussia, but owing to their dilatoriness in taking the field, the
  Prussians were able to beat them in detail. In 1870, reorganized to
  some extent on Prussian lines, they joined their former enemy in the
  war against France, and bore their full share in the glories and
  losses of the campaign, the II. Bavarian corps having suffered more
  heavily than any but the III. Prussian corps. The I. Bavarian corps
  distinguished itself very greatly at Sedan and on the Loire. Bavaria
  still retains her separate war office and special organization, and
  the troops have been less affected by the Prussian influence than
  those of the other states. The Bavarian corps are numbered separately
  (I. Bav., Münich; II. Bav., Würzburg; III. Bav., Nuremberg), and the
  old light blue uniforms and other distinctive peculiarities of detail
  are still maintained.

  91. _Württemberg_ furnishes one army corps (XIII.; headquarters,
  Stuttgart), organized, clothed and equipped in all respects like the
  Prussian army. Like the Bavarians, the Württembergers fought against
  the Prussians in 1866, but in 1870 made common cause with them against
  the French, and by the convention entered into the following year
  placed their army permanently under the command of the Prussian king
  as emperor. The emperor nominates to the highest commands, but the
  king of Württemberg retains the nomination and appointment of officers
  in the lower grades.

  92. The old _Hanoverian Army_ disappeared, of course, with the
  annexation of Hanover to Prussia in 1866, but it is still represented
  officially by certain regiments of the X. army corps, and, in one case
  at least, battle honours won by the King's German Legion in the
  British service are borne on German colours of to-day. The _Hessian
  Army_ is now represented by the XXV. (Grand-ducal Hessian) division,
  which forms part of the XVIII. army corps.

ITALIAN ARMY

93. The old conscription law of the kingdom of Sardinia is the basis of
the military organization of Italy, as its constitution is of that of
the modern Italian kingdom. The Piedmontese have long borne a high
reputation for their military qualities, a reputation shared by the
rulers of the house of Savoy (q.v.), many of whom showed special ability
in preserving the independence of their small kingdom between two such
powerful neighbours as France and Austria. During the wars of the French
Revolution Piedmont was temporarily absorbed into the French republic
and empire. The Italian troops who fought under Napoleon proved
themselves, in many if not most cases, the best of the French allies,
and Italy contributed large numbers of excellent general officers to the
_Grande Armée_.

  After 1815 various causes combined to place Piedmont (Sardinia) at the
  head of the national movement which agitated Italy during the ensuing
  thirty years, and bring her in direct antagonism to Austria. Charles
  Albert, her then ruler, had paid great attention to the army, and when
  Italy rose against Austria in 1848 he took the field with an excellent
  force of nearly 70,000 men. At the outset fortune favoured the arms of
  Italy; but the genius and energy of Radetzky, the veteran Austrian
  commander, turned the tide, and in the summer of 1849 after many
  battles the Piedmontese army was decisively defeated at Novara, and
  her king compelled to sue for peace. Charles Albert abdicated in
  favour of his son Victor Emanuel, a prince who had already
  distinguished himself by his personal gallantry in the field. Under
  his care the army soon recovered its efficiency, and the force which
  joined the allied armies in the Crimea attracted general admiration
  from the excellence of its organization, equipment and discipline. In
  1859 Piedmont again took up arms against Austria for the liberation of
  Italy; but this time she had the powerful assistance of France, and
  played but a subordinate part herself. In this campaign the Sardinian
  army was composed of one cavalry and five infantry divisions, and
  numbered about 60,000 combatants. By the peace of Villafranca, Italy,
  with the exception of Venetia, was freed from the Austrians, and
  Lombardy was added to Piedmont. The revolutionary campaign of
  Garibaldi in the following year united the whole peninsula under the
  rule of Victor Emanuel, and in 1866, when Italy for the third time
  took up arms against Austria--this time as the ally of Prussia--her
  forces had risen to nearly 450,000, of whom about 270,000 actually
  took the field. But in quality these were far from being equal to the
  old Piedmontese army; and the northern army, under the personal
  command of the king, was decisively defeated at Custozza by the
  archduke Albert of Austria.

  The existing organization of the Italian army is determined by the
  laws of 1873, which made universal liability to service the basis of
  recruiting. The territorial system has not, however, been adopted at
  the same time, the materials of which the Italian army is composed
  varying so much that it was decided to blend the different types of
  soldiers so far as possible by causing them to serve together. The
  colonial wars in which Italian troops have taken part have been marked
  with great disasters, but relieved by the gallantry of the officers
  and the rank and file.

RUSSIAN ARMY

94. The history of the Russian army begins with the abolition of the
Strelitz (q.v.) by Peter the Great in 1698, the nucleus of the new
forces being four regiments of foot, two of which are well known to-day
under their old titles of Preobrazhenski and Semenovski. Throughout the
18th century Russian military progress obeyed successive dynasties of
western European models--first those of Prussia, then those of France.
In the earlier part of the 19th century the army, used chiefly in wars
against the revolutionary spirit, became, like others of that time, a
dynastic force; subsequently the "nation in arms" principle reasserted
itself, and on this basis has been carried out the reorganization of
Russia's military power. The enormous development of this since 1874 is
one of the most striking phenomena in recent military history. In 1892,
in expectation of a general European war, whole armies were massed in
the districts of Warsaw and Vilna, three-fifths of the entire forces
being in position on the German and Austrian frontiers.

  The Russo-Japanese War of 1904-5 is generally held to have proved that
  the fighting power of the Russian has in no way diminished in
  intrinsic value from that of the days of Zorndorf, Borodino and
  Sevastopol. The proverbial stubbornness of the rank and file is the
  distinctive quality of the armies of the tsar, and in view of the
  general adoption of two-years' service in other countries it is a
  matter for grave consideration whether, against European forces and in
  defence of their own homes, the Russians would not prove more than
  formidable antagonists to the men of more highly individualized races
  who are their probable opponents. Equally remarkable is the new power
  of redistribution possessed by Russia. Formerly it was usual to count
  upon one campaign at least elapsing before Russia could intervene
  effectively in European wars; much, in fact the greater part, of her
  losses in the Crimean War was due to the enormous distances which had
  to be traversed on foot. Nowadays the original equal distribution of
  the army over the country has been modified in accordance with the
  political needs of each moment. In 1892 the centre of gravity was
  shifted to Poland and Kiev, in 1904 the performances of the
  trans-Siberian railway in transporting troops to the seat of war in
  Manchuria excited the admiration of military Europe. The attitude of
  the army in the troubles which followed upon the Japanese War belongs
  to the history of Russia, not to that of military organization, and it
  will be sufficient to say that the conduct of the "nation in arms" at
  times of political unrest may vary between the extremes of
  unquestioning obedience to authority and the most dangerous form of
  licence, examples of both being frequent in the history of nearly all
  national armies. A remarkable innovation in the modern history of this
  army is the conversion of the whole of the cavalry, except a few
  _élite_ regiments, into dragoons of the old type. After the war of
  1904-5, however, this policy was reversed and the cavalry reformed on
  the usual model. The Cossacks still retain to a large extent the
  peculiarities of the light troops of the 18th century.

SPANISH ARMY

95. The feudal sovereignties of medieval Spain differed but little, in
their military organization, from other feudal states. As usual,
mercenaries were the only forces on which reliance was placed for
foreign wars. These troops called _almugávares_ (Arabic = scouts) won a
great reputation on Italian and Greek battlefields of the 13th century,
and with many transformations in name and character appeared from time
to time up to the Peninsular War. Castile, however, had a military
system very different from the rest. The forces of the kingdom were
composed of local contingents similar to the English _fyrd_,
professional soldiers who were paid followers of the great lords, and
the heavy cavalry of the military orders. The groups of cities called
_Hermandades_, while they existed, also had permanent forces in their
pay. At the union of Castile and Aragon the Castilian methods received a
more general application. The new _Hermandad_ was partly a light
cavalry, partly a police, and was organized in the ratio of one soldier
to every hundred families. In the conquest of Grenada (1482-92)
_mesnadas_ or contingents were furnished by the crown, the nobles and
the cities, and permanently kept in the field. The _Hermandad_ served
throughout the war as a matter of course. From the veterans of this war
was drawn the army which in the Italian wars won its reputation as the
first army in Europe.

In 1596 the home defence of Spain was reorganized and the _ordenanza_,
or militia, which was then formed of all men not belonging to the still
extant feudal contingents, was generally analogous to the system of
"assizes at arms" in England. This _ordenanza_ served in the Peninsular
War.

  96. With the Italian wars of the early 16th century came the
  development of the regular army; a brief account of its place in the
  evolution of armies has been given above. Discipline, the feeling of
  comradeship and soldierly honour were the qualities which marked out
  the Spanish army as the model for others to follow, and for more than
  a century the Spanish army maintained its prestige as the first in
  Europe. The oldest regiments of the present Spanish army claiming
  descent from the _tercios_ date from 1535. An officer whose regiment
  was reduced commonly took a pike in some other corps (e.g. Tilly), the
  _señor soldado_ was counted as a gentleman, and his wife and family
  received state allowances. Nor was this army open only to Spaniards.
  Walloons, Italians, Burgundians and other nationalities ruled over by
  the Habsburgs all contributed their quotas. But the career of the old
  army came to an end at Rocroi (1643), and after this the forces of the
  monarchy began more and more to conform to the French model.

  97. The military history of Spain from 1650 to 1700 is full of
  incident, and in the long war of the Spanish Succession both the army
  and the _ordenanza_ found almost continuous employment. They were now
  organized, as were most other armies of Europe, on the lines of the
  French army, and in 1714 the old _tercios_, which had served in the
  Spanish Netherlands under Marlborough, were brought to Spain. The
  king's regiment "Zamora" of the present army descends from one of
  these which, as the _tercio_ of Bovadilla, had been raised in 1580.
  The army underwent few changes of importance during the 18th century,
  and it is interesting to note that there were never less than three
  Irish regiments in the service. In 1808 the _Irlanda, Ultonia_ (=
  Ulster) and _Hibernia_ regiments had come to consist (as had similar
  corps in the French service before the Revolution) largely of native
  soldiers. At that time the Spanish army consisted of 119 Spanish and
  foreign (Swiss, Walloon and Irish) battalions, with 24 cavalry
  regiments and about 8000 artillery and engineers. There were further
  51 battalions of militia, and the total forces numbered actually
  137,000. The part played by the Spanish standing army in the
  Peninsular War was certainly wholly insignificant relatively to these
  figures. It must be borne in mind, however, that only continued wars
  can give real value to long-service troops of the old style, and this
  advantage the Spanish regulars did not possess. Further, the general
  decadence of administration reacted in the usual way, the appointment
  of court favourites to high command was a flagrant evil, and all that
  can be urged is that the best elements of the army behaved as well as
  did the Prussians of 1806, that the higher leading and the
  administration of the army in the field were both sufficiently weak to
  have ruined most armies, and that the men were drawn from the same
  country and the same classes which furnished the _guerrilleros_ whom
  it became fashionable to exalt at the expense of the soldiers. In the
  later campaigns of Wellington, Spanish divisions did good service, and
  the corps of La Romaña (a picked contingent of troops which had been
  sent before the war to Denmark at Napoleon's instance), though often
  defeated, always retained some cohesion and discipline. But the result
  of this war, the second French invasion, and the continued civil wars
  of the 19th century was the destruction of the old army, and the
  present army of Spain still bears traces of the confusion out of which
  it arose.

  The most important changes were in 1870, when conscription was
  introduced, and in 1872, when universal service was proposed in its
  place. The military virtues of the rank and file and the devotion of
  the officers were conspicuously displayed in the Spanish-American War
  of 1898, and it cannot be claimed even for the Germans of 1870 that
  they fired so coolly and accurately as did the defenders of S. Juan
  and El Caney.

TURKISH ARMY

98. The writers who have left the most complete and trustworthy
contemporary accounts of the Turkish army in the 14th and 15th
centuries, when it reached the height of its most characteristic
development, are Bertrandon de la Brocquière, equerry to Philip the
Good, duke of Burgundy, and Francesco Filelfo of Tolentino. Bertrandon,
a professional soldier, visited Palestine in 1432, and returned overland
in 1433, traversing the Balkan Peninsula by the main trade-route from
Constantinople to Belgrade. He wrote an account of his journey for
Philip: see _Early Travels in Palestine_, translated and edited by T.
Wright (London, 1848). Filelfo served as secretary to the Venetian
_baylo_ at Constantinople, and recorded his observations in a series of
letters (see FILELFO). Both ascribe the military superiority of the
Turks over the nations of western Europe to two facts--firstly to their
possession of a well-organized standing army, an institution unknown
elsewhere, and secondly to their far stricter discipline, itself a
result of their military organization and of the moral training afforded
by Islam.

  The regular troops comprised the Janissaries (q.v.), a corps of
  infantry recruited from captured sons of Christians, and trained to
  form a privileged caste of scientific soldiers and religious fanatics;
  and the Spahis, a body of cavalry similarly recruited, and armed with
  scimitar, mace and bow. Celibacy was one of the rules of this standing
  army, which, in its semi-monastic ideals and constitution, resembled
  the knightly orders of the West in their prime. The Janissaries
  numbered about 12,000, the Spahis about 8000. A second army of some
  40,000 men, mostly mounted and armed like the Spahis, was feudal in
  character, and consisted chiefly of the personal followers of the
  Moslem nobility; more than half its numbers were recruited in Europe.
  This force of 60,000 trained soldiers was accompanied by a horde of
  irregulars, levied chiefly among the barbarous mountaineers of the
  Balkans and Asia Minor, and very ill-armed and ill-disciplined. Their
  numbers may be estimated at 140,000, for Bertrandon gives 200,000 as
  the total of the Turkish forces. Many 15th and 16th century writers
  give a smaller total, but refer only to the standing and feudal
  armies. Others place the total higher. Laonicus Chalcocondylas in his
  _Turcica Historia_ states that at the siege of Constantinople in 1453
  the sultan commanded 400,000 troops, but most other eye-witnesses of
  the siege give a total varying from 150,000 to 300,000. Many Christian
  soldiers of fortune enlisted with the Turks as artillerists or
  engineers, and supplied them at Constantinople with the most powerful
  cannon of the age. Other Christians were compelled to serve as
  engineers or in the ranks. As late as 1683 a corps of Wallachians was
  forced to join the Turkish army before Vienna, and entrusted with the
  task of bridging the Danube. But in the 18th and early 19th centuries
  the introduction of Christians tended to weaken the _moral_ of the
  army already sapped by defeat; it was found impossible to maintain the
  discipline of the Janissaries, whose privileges had become a source of
  danger; and the feudal nobility became more and more independent of
  the sultan's authority. These three causes contributed to make
  reorganization inevitable.

  The destruction of the Janissaries in 1826 marked the close of the
  history of the old Turkish army; already the re-creation of the
  service on the accepted models of western Europe had been commenced.
  This was still incomplete when the new force was called upon to meet
  the Russians in 1828, and though the army displayed its accustomed
  bravery, its defective organization and other causes led to its
  defeat. Since then the army has been almost as constantly on active
  service as the British; the Crimean War, the Russo-Turkish War of 1877
  and the Greco-Turkish War of 1897 witnessed the employment of a large
  proportion of the sultan's available forces, while innumerable local
  revolts in different parts of the empire called for great exertions,
  and often for fierce fighting on the part of the troops locally in
  garrison and those sent up from the nearest provinces.

UNITED STATES ARMY

99. The regular army of the United States has always been small. From
the first it has been a voluntary force, and until 1898 its chief work
in peace was to furnish numerous small posts on the frontier and amongst
the Indians, and to act as a reserve to the civil power in the great
cities. In war-time the regular army, if, as was usually the case, it
was insufficient in numbers for the task of subduing the enemy, formed
the nucleus of large armies raised "for the war." In 1790 the rank and
file of the army, as fixed by act of Congress, amounted to 1216 men; and
in 1814 an English expedition of only 3500 men was able to seize and
burn Washington, the capital of a country which even then numbered eight
millions of inhabitants. In 1861, at the beginning of the Civil War, the
whole regular force amounted to about 15,300 men. In April of that year
the president called out 75,000 volunteers for three months; and in May
a further call for 42,000 was made. In July a call for 500,000 men was
authorized by Congress, and as even this vast force proved insufficient
it was found necessary to use a system of drafts. In October 1863 a levy
of 300,000 men was ordered, and in February 1864 a further call of
500,000 was made. Finally, in the beginning of 1865 two further levies,
amounting in all to 500,000 men, were ordered, but were only partially
carried out in consequence of the cessation of hostilities. The total
number of men called under arms by the government of the United States,
between April 1861 and April 1865, amounted to 2,759,049, of whom
2,656,053 were actually embodied in the armies. If to these be added the
1,100,000 men embodied by the South during the same time, the total
armed forces reach the enormous amount of nearly four millions, drawn
from a population of only 32 millions--figures before which the
celebrated uprising of the French nation in 1793, or the efforts of
France and Germany in the Franco-German War, sink into insignificance.
These 2,700,000 Federals were organized into volunteer regiments bearing
state designations. The officers, except general and staff officers,
were appointed by the governors of the respective states. The maximum
authorized strength of the regular army never, during the war, exceeded
40,000 men; and the number in the field, especially towards the close of
the war, was very much less. The states, in order to obtain men to fill
their quotas, offered liberal bounties to induce men to enlist, and it
therefore became very difficult to obtain recruits for the regular army,
for which no bounties were given. The regular regiments accordingly
dwindled away to skeletons. The number of officers present was also much
reduced, since many of them, while retaining their regular commissions,
held higher rank in the volunteer army. After the close of the Civil War
the volunteers were mustered out; and by the act of Congress of the 28th
of July 1866 the line of the army was made to consist of 10 regiments of
cavalry of 12 troops each, 5 regiments of artillery of 12 batteries each
and 45 regiments of infantry of 10 companies. The actual strength in
August 1867 was 53,962. The act of the 3rd of March 1869 reduced the
number of infantry regiments to 25 and the enlisted strength of the army
to 35,036. The numbers were further reduced, without change in
organization, to 32,788 in 1870 and to 25,000 in 1874. The latter number
remained the maximum for twenty-four years.

In March 1898, in view of hostilities with Spain, the artillery was
increased by 2 regiments, and, in April, 2 companies were added to each
infantry regiment, giving it 3 battalions of 4 companies each. The
strength of batteries, troops and companies was increased, the maximum
enlisted strength reached during 1898 being over 63,000. A volunteer
army was also organized. Of this army, 3 regiments of engineer troops, 3
of cavalry and 10 of infantry were United States volunteers, all the
officers being commissioned by the president. The other organizations
came from the states, the officers being appointed by the respective
governors. As fast as they were organized and filled up, they were
mustered into the service of the United States. The total number
furnished for the war with Spain was 10,017 officers and 213,218
enlisted men. All general and staff officers were appointed by the
president. Three hundred and eighty-seven officers of the regular army
received volunteer commissions. After the conclusion of hostilities with
Spain, the mustering out of the volunteers was begun, and by June 1899
all the volunteers, except those in the Philippines, were out of the
service. The latter, as well as those serving elsewhere, having enlisted
only for the war, were brought home and mustered out as soon as
practicable.

The act of the 2nd of March 1899 added 2 batteries to each regiment of
artillery. On the 2nd of February 1901 Congress passed an important bill
providing for the reorganization and augmentation (max. 100,000) of the
regular army, and other measures followed in the next years. (See UNITED
STATES.)

MINOR ARMIES

  100. _Dutch and Belgian Armies._--The military power of the "United
  Provinces" dates its rise from the middle of the 16th century, when,
  after a long and sanguinary struggle, they succeeded in emancipating
  themselves from the yoke of Spain; and in the following century it
  received considerable development in consequence of the wars they had
  to maintain against Louis XIV. In 1702 they had in their pay upwards
  of 100,000 men, including many English and Scottish regiments, besides
  30,000 in the service of the Dutch East India Company. But the
  slaughter of Malplaquet deprived the republic of the flower of the
  army. Its part in the War of the Austrian Succession was far from
  being as creditable as its earlier deeds, a Prussian army overran
  Holland in 1787 almost without opposition, and at the beginning of the
  wars of the French Revolution the army had fallen to 36,000 men. In
  1795 Holland was conquered by the French under Pichegru, and in the
  course of the changes which ensued the army was entirely reorganized,
  and under French direction bore its share in the great wars of the
  empire.

  With the fall of Napoleon and the reconstitution of the Netherlands,
  the Dutch-Belgian army, formed of the troops of the now united
  countries, came into existence. The army fought at Waterloo, but was
  not destined to a long career, for the revolution of 1830 brought
  about the separation of Belgium. A Dutch garrison under Baron Chassé,
  a distinguished veteran of the Napoleonic wars, defended Antwerp
  against the French under Marshal Gérard, and the Netherlands have been
  engaged in many arduous colonial wars in the East Indies. The Belgian
  army similarly has contributed officers and non-commissioned officers
  to the service of the Congo Free State.

  101. _Swiss Army._--The inhabitants of Switzerland were always a hardy
  and independent race, but their high military reputation dates from
  the middle of the 15th century, when the comparatively ill-armed and
  untrained mountaineers signally defeated Charles the Bold of Burgundy
  and the flower of the chivalry of Europe in the battles of Granson,
  Morat and Nancy. The Swabian war, towards the end of that century, and
  the Milanese war, at the beginning of the following one, added to the
  fame of the Swiss infantry, and made it the model on which that arm
  was formed all over Europe. The wealthier countries vied with each
  other in hiring them as mercenaries, and the poor but warlike Swiss
  found the profession of arms a lucrative one.

  A brief account of the Swiss mercenaries will be found earlier in this
  article. Their fall was due in the end to their own indiscipline in
  the first place, and the rise of the Spanish standing army and its
  musketeers in the second. Yet it does not seem that the military
  reputation of the Swiss was discredited, even by reverses such as
  Marignan. On the contrary, they continued all through the 17th and
  18th centuries to furnish whole regiments for the service of other
  countries, notably of France, and individuals, like Jomini in a later
  age, followed the career of the soldier of fortune everywhere. The
  most notable incident in the later military history of the Swiss, the
  heroic faithfulness of Louis XVI.'s Swiss guard, is proverbial, and
  has been commemorated with just pride by their countrymen. The French
  Revolutionary armies overran Switzerland, as they did all the small
  neighbouring states, and during Napoleon's career she had to submit to
  his rule, and furnish her contingent to his armies. On the fall of
  Napoleon she regained her independence, and returned to her old trade
  of furnishing soldiers to the sovereigns and powers of Europe. Charles
  X. of France had at one time as many as 17,000 Swiss in his pay;
  Naples and Rome had each four regiments. The recruiting for these
  foreign services was openly acknowledged and encouraged by the
  government. The young Swiss engaged usually for a period of four or
  six years; they were formed in separate regiments, officered by
  countrymen of their own, and received a higher rate of pay than the
  national regiments; and at the close of their engagement returned with
  their earnings to settle down on their paternal holdings. A series of
  revolutions, however, expelled them from France and Italy, and
  recently the advance of liberal ideas, and the creation of great
  national armies based on the principle of personal service, has
  destroyed their occupation. Switzerland is now remarkable in a
  military sense as being the only country that maintains no standing
  army (see Militia).

  102. The _Swedish Army_ can look back with pride to the days of
  Gustavus Adolphus and of Charles XII. The contributions made by it to
  the military science of the 17th century have been noticed above. The
  triumphs of the small and highly disciplined army of Charles were
  often such as to recall the similar victories of the Greeks under
  Alexander. The then nebulous armies of Russia and Poland resembled
  indeed the forces of Darius in the 4th century B.C., but Peter the
  Great succeeded at last in producing a true army, and the resistance
  of the Swedes collapsed under the weight of the vastly superior
  numbers then brought against them.

  The _Danish Army_ has a long and meritorious record of good service
  dating from the Thirty Years' War.

  103. The existing Army of _Portugal_ dates from the Peninsular War,
  when a considerable force of Portuguese, at one time exceeding 60,000
  men, was organized under Marshal Beresford. Trained and partly
  officered by English officers, it proved itself not unworthy of its
  allies, and bore its full share in the series of campaigns and battles
  by which the French were ultimately expelled from Spain. At the peace
  the army numbered about 50,000 infantry and 5000 cavalry, formed on
  the English model, and all in the highest state of efficiency. This
  force was reduced in 1821, under the new constitutional government, to
  about one-half.

  104. The _Rumanian, Bulgarian_ and _Servian_ armies are the youngest
  in Europe. The conduct of the Rumanians before Plevna in 1877 earned
  for them the respect of soldiers of all countries. Servia and Bulgaria
  came to war in 1885, and the Bulgarian soldiers, under the most
  adverse conditions, achieved splendid victories under the leadership
  of their own officers. In the crisis following the Austrian annexation
  of Bosnia-Herzegovina (1908-9), it seemed likely that the Servian
  forces might play an unexpectedly active part in war even with a
  strong power.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Below are the titles of some of the more important
  works on the subject of armies. See also under biographical headings
  and articles dealing with the several arms, &c. A large proportion of
  the works mentioned below are concerned mainly with the development of
  strategy and tactics.

  V. der Goltz, _Das Volk in Waffen_ (1883, new ed., 1898, English
  translation, P.A. Ashworth, _Nation in Arms_, London, 1887, new ed.,
  1907, French, _Nation armée_, Paris, 1889); Jähns, _Heeresverfassung
  und Völkerleben_ (Berlin, 1885); Berndt, _Die Zahl im Kriege_ (Vienna,
  1895); F.N. Maude, _Evolution of Modern Strategy_ (1903), _Voluntary
  versus Compulsory Service_ (1897), and _War and the World's Life_
  (1907); Pierron, _Méthodes de guerre_, vol. i.; Jähns, _Geschichte der
  Kriegswissenschaften_ (an exhaustive bibliography, with critical
  notes); Troschke, _Mil. Litteratur seit den Befreiungskriegen_
  (Berlin, 1870); T.A. Dodge, _Great Captains_ (_Alexander, Hannibal,
  Caesar, Gustavus, Napoleon_); Bronsart v. Schellendorf (Eng. trans.,
  War Office, 1905) _Duties of the General Staff_; Favé, _Histoire et
  tactique des trois armes_ (Liége, 1850); Maynert, _Gesch. des
  Kriegswesens u. der Heeresverfassungen in Europa_ (Vienna, 1869);
  Jähns, _Handbuch für eine Geschichte des Kriegswesens v. der Urzeit
  bis zur Renaissance_ (Leipzig, 1880); de la Barre Duparcq, _Histoire
  de l'art de la guerre avant l'usage de poudre_ (Paris, 1860); Rüstow
  and Köchly, _Geschichte des griechischen Kriegswesens_ (Aarau, 1852);
  Köchly and Rüstow, _Griechische Kriegsschriftsteller_ (Leipzig, 1855);
  Förster, in _Hermes_, xii. (1877); D.G. Hogarth, _Philip and
  Alexander_ (London, 1897); Macdougall, _Campaigns of Hannibal_
  (London, 1858); Rüstow, _Heerwesen, &c., Julius Casars_ (Nordhausen,
  1855); _Organ der M. Wissensch. Verein_ of 1877 (Vienna); Polybius
  literature of the 17th and 18th centuries; supplement to _M.W.B._,
  1883; the works of Xenophon, Aelian, Arrian, Vegetius, Polybius,
  Caesar, &c. (see Köchly and Rüstow: a collection was made in the 15th
  century, under the title _Veteres de re militari scriptores_, 1487);
  Oman, _A History of the Art of War: Middle Ages_ (London, 1898);
  Delpech, _La Tactique au XIII^e siècle_ (Paris, 1886); Kohler, _Die
  Entwickelung des Kriegswesens v. II. Jahrhdt. bis zu den
  Hussitenkriegen_ (Breslau, 1886-1893); Ricotti, _Storia delle
  Compagnie di Ventura_ (Turin, 1846); Steger, _Gesch. Francesco Sforzas
  und d. ital. Condottieri_ (Leipzig, 1865); J.A. Symonds, _The
  Renaissance in Italy and The Age of the Despots; A Brandenburg
  Mobilization of 1477_ (German General Staff Monograph, No. 3);
  Palacky, "Kriegskunst der Böhmen," _Zeitschrift bohmisch. Museums_
  (Prague, 1828); George, _Battles of English History_ (London, 1895);
  Biottot, _Les Grands inspirés devant la science: Jeanne d'Arc_ (Paris,
  1907); V. Ellger, _Kriegswesen, &c., der Eidgenossen, 14., 15., 16.
  Jahrhdt._ (1873); de la Chauvelays, _Les Armées de Charles le
  Téméraire_ (Paris, 1879); Guillaume, _Hist. des bandes d'ordonnance
  dans les Pays-Bas_ (Brussels, 1873); the works of Froissart, de
  Brantôme, Machiavelli, Lienhard Frönsperger (_Kriegsbuch_, 1570), de
  la Noue, du Bellay, &c.; Villari, _Life and Times of Machiavelli_
  (English version); "Die frommen Landsknechte" (_M. W. B._, supplement,
  1880); _Kriegsbilder aus der Zeit der Landsknechte_ (Stuttgart, 1883);
  C.H. Firth, _Cromwell's Army_ (London, 1902); Heilmann, _Das
  Kriegswesen der Kaiserlichen und Schweden_ (Leipzig, 1850); C. Walton,
  _History of the British Standing Army, 1660-1700_ (London, 1894); E.A.
  Altnam in _United Service Magazine_, February 1907; Austrian official
  history of Prince Eugene's campaigns, &c.; de la Barre Duparcq, _Hist,
  milit. de la Prusse avant 1756_ (Paris, 1857); Marsigli, _L'État
  militaire de l'emp. ottoman_ (1732); Prussian Staff History of the
  Silesian wars; C. von B(inder)-K(rieglstein), _Geist und Stoff im
  Kriege_ (Vienna, 1895); E. d'Hauterive, _L'Armée sous la Révolution_
  (Paris, 1894); C. Rousset, _Les Volontaires de 1791-1794_; Michelet,
  _Les Soldats de la Révolution_ (Paris, 1878); publications of the
  French general staff on the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars; H.
  Bonnal, _Esprit de la guerre moderne_ (a series of studies in military
  history, 1805-1870); Paimblant du Rouil, _La Division Durutte, les
  Réfractaires_, also supplement, _M.W.B._, 1890; "The French
  Conscription" (suppl. _M.W.B._, 1892); C. v. der Goltz, _Von Rossbach
  bis Jena und Auerstädt_ (a new edition of the original _Rossbach und
  Jena_, Berlin, 1883); German General Staff Monograph, No. 10; _M.W.B._
  supplements of 1845, 1846, 1847, 1854, 1855, 1856, 1857, 1858, 1862,
  1865, 1866, 1867, 1887; v. Duncker, _Preussen während der franz.
  Okkupation_ (1872); Archives of Prussian war ministry, publications of
  1892 and 1896; histories of the wars of 1866 and 1870; V. Chareton,
  _Comme la Prusse a préparé sa revanche, 1806-1813; Reports_ of Col.
  Baron Stoffel, French attaché at Berlin (translation into English, War
  Office, London); Haxthausen, _Les Forces militaires de la Prusse_
  (Paris, 1853); de la Barre Duparcq, _Études historiques générales et
  militaires sur la Prusse_ (Paris, 1854); Paixhans, _Constitution
  militaire de la France_ (Paris, 1849); Duc d'Aumale, _Les Institutions
  militaires de la France_ (Paris, 1867); C. v. Decker, _Über die
  Persönlichkeit des preussischen Soldaten_ (Berlin, 1842); War Office,
  _Army Book of the British Empire_ (London, 1893); M. Jähns, _Das
  französische Heer von der grossen Revolution bis zur Gegenwart_
  (Leipzig, 1873); Baron Kaulbars, _The German Army_ (in Russian) [St
  Petersburg, 1890]; _Die Schweiz im 19. Jahrhundert_ (Berne and
  Lausanne, 1899); Heimann, _L'Armée allemande_ (Paris, 1895); R. de
  l'Homme de Courbière, _Grundzüge der deutschen Militarverwaltung_
  (Berlin, 1882); G.F.R. Henderson, _The Science of War_ (London, 1905);
  J.W. Fortescue, _History of the British Army_ (London, 1899- ----); R.
  de l'Homme de Courbière, _Gesch. der brandenburg-preussisch.
  Heeresverfassung_ (Berlin, 1852); Krippentagel and Küstel, _Die
  preuss. Armee von der ältesten Zeit bis zur Gegenwart_ (Berlin, 1883);
  Gansauge, _Das brandenbg.-preuss. Kriegswesen, 1440, 1640, 1740_
  (Berlin, 1839); A. v. Boguslawksi, _Die Landwehr, 1813-1893_ (1893);
  A.R. v. Sichart, _Gesch. d. k. hannover. Armee_ (Hanover, 1866); v.
  Reitzenstein, _Die k. hannover. Kavallerie, 1631-1866_ (1892); Schlee,
  _Zur Gesch. des hessischen Kriegswesens_ (Kassel, 1867); Leichtlen,
  _Badens Kriegsverfassung_ (Carlsruhe, 1815); v. Stadlinger, _Gesch.
  des württembergischen Kriegswesens_ (Stuttgart, 1858); Münich,
  _Entwickelung der bayerischen Armee_ (Münich, 1864); official _Gesch.
  d. k. bayer. Armee_ (Münich, 1901 onward); Würdinger,
  _Kriegsgeschichte v. Bayern_ (Münich, 1868); H. Meynert, _Gesch. des
  österr. Kriegswesens_ (Vienna, 1852), _Kriegswesen Ungarns_ (Vienna,
  1876); Anger, _Gesch. der K.-K. Armee_ (Vienna, 1886); _Beitrage zur
  Gesch. des österr. Heerwesens, 1754-1814_ (Vienna, 1872); R. v.
  Ottenfeld and Teuber, _Die österr. Armee, 1700-1867_ (Vienna, 1895);
  v. Wrede, _Gesch. d. K. u. K. Wehrmacht_ (Vienna, 1902); May de
  Rainmoter, _Histoire militaire de la Suisse_ (Lausanne, 1788); Cusachs
  y Barado, _La Vida Militar en España_ (Barcelona, 1888); Guillaume,
  _Hist. de l'infanterie wallonne sous la maison d'Espagne_ (Brussels,
  1876); A. Vitu, _Histoire civile de l'armée_ (Paris, 1868); A. Pascal,
  _Hist. de l'armée_ (Paris, 1847); L. Jablonski, _L'Armée française à
  travers les âges_; C. Romagny, _Hist. générale de l'armée nationale_
  (Paris, 1893); E. Simond, _Hist. mil. de la France_; Susane, _Hist. de
  l'infanterie, cavalerie, artillerie françaises_ (Paris, 1874); Père
  Daniel, _Hist. des milices françaises_ (1721); the official
  _Historique des corps de troupe_ (Paris, 1900- ----); Cahu, _Le Soldat
  français_ (Paris, 1876); J. Molard, _Cent ans de l'armée française,
  1780-1889_ (Paris, 1890); v. Stein, _Lehre vom Heerwesen_ (Stuttgart,
  1872); du Verger de S. Thomas, _L'Italie et son armée_, 1865 (Paris,
  1866); "C. Martel," _Military Italy_ (London, 1884); Sir R. Biddulph,
  _Lord Cardwell at the War Office_ (London, 1904); Willoughby Verner,
  _Military Life of the Duke of Cambridge_ (London, 1905); W.H. Daniel,
  _The Military Forces of the Crown_ (London, 1902); War Office, _Annual
  Report of the British Army_; Broome, _Rise and Progress of the Bengal
  Army_ (Calcutta, 1850); W.J. Wilson, _Hist. of the Madras Army_
  (London, 1882-1885); C.M. Clode, _Military Forces of the Crown_;
  Blume, _Die Grundlage unserer Wehrkraft_ (Berlin, 1899); Spenser
  Wilkinson, _The Brain of an Army_ (London, 1890 and 1895); v. Olberg,
  _Die französische Armee im Exerzirplatz und im Felde_ (Berlin, 1861);
  _Die Heere und Flotte der Gegenwart_, ed. Zepelin (Berlin, 1896);
  Molard, _Puissances militaires de l'Europe_ (Paris, 1895); works of
  Montecucculi, Puységur, Vauban, Feuquières, Guibert, Folard, Guichard,
  Joly de Maizeroy, Frederick the Great, Marshal Saxe, the prince de
  Ligne, Napoleon, Carnot, Scharnhorst, Clausewitz, Napoleon III.,
  Moltke, Hamley, &c.

  The principal general military periodicals are:--English, _Journal of
  the R. United Service Institution_; United States, _Journal of the
  Military Service Institution_; French, _Revue d'histoire_ and _Revue
  des armées étrangères_ (general staff); Rau and Lauth, _L'État
  militaire des puissances_ (about every 4 years); _Revue militaire
  générale_, founded in 1907 by General Langlois; _Almanach du drapeau_
  (a popular _aide-mémoire_ published annually); German, the
  _Vierteljahrsheft_ of the general staff; _Militar-Wochenblatt_
  (referred to above as _M.W.B._--the supplements are of great value);
  von Löbell's _Jahresberichte_ (annual detailed reports on the state,
  &c., of all armies--an English _précis_ appears annually in the
  _Journal_ of the R.U.S. Institution); Austrian, _Streffleurs öst.
  Militär-Zeitschrift_, with which was amalgamated (1907) the _Organ d.
  militärwissenschaft. Vereins._ The British War Office issues from time
  to time handbooks dealing with foreign armies, and, quarterly since
  April 1907, a critical review and bibliography of recent military
  literature in the principal languages, under the name of _Recent
  Publications of Military Interest_.     (C. F. A.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The phrase "K. und K." (_Kaiserlich und Königlich_) is applied to
    all services common to the Austrian and Hungarian armies. "K.-K."
    (_Kaiserlich-Königlich_) refers strictly only to the troops of
    Austria, the Hungarian army being known as the "K. Ung." (Royal
    Hungarian) service.

  [2] From _Krümperpferde_ (cast horses attached to batteries, &c., for
    odd jobs), applied to the recruits in jest.