ARNAUD, HENRI (1641-1721), pastor and general of the Vaudois or
Waldensians of Piedmont, was born at Embrun. About 1650 his family
returned to their native valley of Luserna, where Arnaud was educated at
La Tour (the chief village), later visiting the college at Basel (1662
and 1668) and the Academy at Geneva (1666). He then returned home, and
seems to have been pastor in several of the Vaudois valleys before
attaining that position at La Tour (1685). He was thus the natural
leader of his co-religionists after Victor Amadeus expelled them (1686)
from their valleys, and most probably visited Holland, the ruler of
which, William of Orange, certainly gave him help and money. Arnaud
occupied himself with organizing his 3000 countrymen who had taken
refuge in Switzerland, and who twice (1687-1688) attempted to regain
their homes. The English revolution of 1688, and the election of William
to the throne, encouraged the Vaudois to make yet another attempt.
Furnished with detailed instructions from the veteran Josué Janavel
(prevented by age from taking part in the expedition) Arnaud, with about
1000 followers, started (August 17, 1689) from near Nyon on the Lake of
Geneva for the _glorieuse rentrée_. On the 27th of August, the valiant
band, after many hardships and dangers, reached the Valley of St
Martin, having passed by Sallanches and crossed the Col de Very (6506
ft.), the Enclave de la Fenêtre (7425 ft.), the Col du Bonhomme (8147
ft.), the Col du Mont Iseran (9085 ft.), the Grand Mont Cenis (6893
ft.), the Petit Mont Cenis (7166 ft.), the Col de Clapier (8173 ft.),
the Col de Côteplane (7589 ft.), and the Col du Piz (8550 ft.). They
soon took refuge in the lofty and secure rocky citadel of the Balsille,
where they were besieged (October 24, 1689 to May 14, 1690) by the
troops (about 4000 in number) of the king of France and the duke of
Savoy. They maintained this natural fortress against many fierce attacks
and during the whole of a winter. In particular, on the 2nd of May, one
assault was defeated without the loss of a single man of Arnaud's small
band. But another attack (May 14) was not so successful, so that Arnaud
withdrew his force, under cover of a thick mist, and led them over the
hills to the valley of Angrogna, above La Tour. A month later the
Vaudois were received into favour by the duke of Savoy, who had then
abandoned his alliance with France for one with Great Britain and
Holland. Hence for the next six years the Vaudois helped Savoy against
France, though suffering much from the repeated attacks of the French
troops. But by a clause in the treaty of peace of 1696, made public in
1698, Victor Amadeus again became hostile to the Vaudois, about 3000 of
whom, with Arnaud, found a shelter in Protestant countries, mainly in
Württemberg, where Arnaud became the pastor of Dürrmenz-Schönenberg,
N.W. of Stuttgart (1699). Once again (1704-1706) the Vaudois aided the
duke against France. Arnaud, however, took no part in the military
operations, though he visited England (1707) to obtain pecuniary aid
from Queen Anne. He died at Schönenberg (which was the church hamlet of
the parish of Dürrmenz) in 1721. It was during his retirement that he
compiled from various documents by other hands his _Histoire de la
glorieuse rentrée des Vaudois dans leurs vallées_, which was published
(probably at Cassel) in 1710, with a dedication to Queen Anne. It was
translated into English (1827) by H. Dyke Acland, and has also appeared
in German and Dutch versions. A part of the original MS. is preserved in
the Royal Library in Berlin.

  See K.H. Klaiber, _Henri Arnaud, ein Lebensbild_ (Stuttgart, 1880); A.
  de Rochas d'Aiglun, _Les Vallées vaudoises_ (Paris, 1881); various
  chapters in the _Bulletin du bicentenaire de la glorieuse rentrée_
  (Turin, 1889).     (W. A. B. C.)