ARNE, THOMAS AUGUSTINE (1710-1778), English musical composer, was born
in London on the 12th of March 1710, his father being an upholsterer.
Intended for the legal profession, he was educated at Eton, and
afterwards apprenticed to an attorney for three years. His natural
inclination for music, however, proved irresistible, and his father,
finding from his performance at an amateur musical party that he was
already a skilful violinist, furnished him with the means of educating
himself in his favourite art. On the 7th of March 1733 he produced his
first work at Lincoln's Inn Fields theatre, a setting of Addison's
_Rosamond_, the heroine's part being performed by his sister, Susanna
Maria, who afterwards became celebrated as Mrs Gibber. This proving a
success was immediately followed by a burletta, entitled _The Opera of
Operas_, based on Fielding's _Tragedy of Tragedies_. The part of Tom
Thumb was played by Arne's young brother, and the opera was produced at
the Haymarket theatre. On the 19th of December 1733 Arne produced at the
same theatre the masque _Dido and Aeneas_, a subject of which the
musical conception had been immortalized for Englishmen more than half a
century earlier by Henry Purcell. Arne's individuality of style first
distinctly asserted itself in the music to Dr Dalton's adaptation of
Milton's _Comus_, which was performed at Drury Lane in 1738, and
speedily established his reputation. In 1740 he wrote the music for
Thomson and Mallet's _Masque of Alfred_, which is noteworthy as
containing the most popular of all his airs--"Rule, Britannia!" In 1740
he also wrote his beautiful settings of the songs, "Under the greenwood
tree," "Blow, blow, thou winter wind" and "When daisies pied," for a
performance of Shakespeare's _As You Like It_. Four years before this,
in 1736, he had married Cecilia, the eldest daughter of Charles Young,
organist of All Hallows Barking. She was considered the finest English
singer of the day and was frequently engaged by Handel in the
performance of his music. In 1742 Arne went with his wife to Dublin,
where he remained two years and produced his oratorio _Abel_, containing
the beautiful melody known as the Hymn of Eve, the operas _Britannia,
Eliza_ and _Comus_, and where he also gave a number of successful
concerts. On his return to London he was engaged as leader of the band
at Drury Lane theatre (1744), and as composer at Vauxhall (1745). In
this latter year he composed his successful pastoral dialogue, _Colin
and Phoebe_, and in 1746 the song, "Where the bee sucks." In 1759 he
received the degree of doctor of music from Oxford. In 1760 he
transferred his services to Covent Garden theatre, where on the 28th of
November he produced his _Thomas and Sally_. Here, too, on the 2nd of
February 1762 he produced his _Artaxerxes_, an opera in the Italian
style with recitative instead of spoken dialogue, the popularity of
which is attested by the fact that it continued to be performed at
intervals for upwards of eighty years. The libretto, by Arne himself,
was a very poor translation of Metastasio's _Artaserse_. In 1762 also
was produced the ballad-opera _Love in a Cottage_. His oratorio
_Judith_, of which the first performance was on the 27th of February
1761 at Drury Lane, was revived at the chapel of the Lock hospital,
Pimlico, on the 29th of February 1764, in which year was also performed
his setting of Metastasio's _Olimpiade_ in the original language at the
King's theatre in the Haymarket. At a later performance of _Judith_ at
Covent Garden theatre on the 26th of February 1773 Arne for the first
time introduced female voices into oratorio choruses. In 1769 he wrote
the musical parts for Garrick's ode for the Shakespeare jubilee at
Stratford-on-Avon, and in 1770 he gave a mutilated version of Purcell's
_King Arthur_. One of his last dramatic works was the music to Mason's
_Caractacus_, published in 1775. Though inferior to Purcell in intensity
of feeling, Arne has not been surpassed as a composer of graceful and
attractive melody. There is true genius in such airs as "Rule,
Britannia!" and "Where the bee sucks," which still retain their original
freshness and popularity. As a writer of glees he does not take such
high rank, though he deserves notice as the leader in the revival of
that peculiarly English form of composition. He was author as well as
composer of _The Guardian outwitted_, _The Rose_, _The Contest of Beauty
and Virtue_, and _Phoebe at Court_. Dr Arne died on the 5th of March
1778, and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden.

  See also the article in _Grove's Dictionary_ (new ed.); and two
  interesting papers in the _Musical Times_, November and December 1901.