ARNOULD-PLESSY, JEANNE SYLVANIE (1819-1897), French actress, was born in
Metz on the 7th of September 1819, the daughter of a local actor named
Plessy. She was a pupil of Samson at the Conservatoire in 1829, and made
her _début_ as Emma at the Comédie Française in 1834 in Alexandre
Duval's _La Fille d'honneur_. She had an immense success, and Mlle Mars,
to whom the public already compared her, took her up. Until 1845 she had
prominent parts in all the plays, new and old, at the Théâtre Français,
when suddenly at the height of her success, she left Paris and went to
London, marrying the dramatic author, J.F. Arnould (d. 1854), a man much
older than herself. The Comédie Française, after having tried in vain to
bring her back, brought a suit against her, and obtained heavy damages.
In the meantime Madame Arnould-Plessy accepted an engagement at the
French theatre at St Petersburg, where she played for nine years. In
1855 she returned to Paris and was re-admitted to the Comédie Française,
as _pensionnaire_ with an engagement for eight years. This second part
of her career was even more brilliant than the first. She revived some
of her old rôles, but began to abandon the _jeunes premières_ for the
"lead," in which she had a success unequalled since the retirement of
Mlle Mars. Her later triumphs were especially associated with new plays
by Émile Augier, _Le Fils de Giboyer_ and _Maître Guerin_. Her last
appearance was in Edouard Cadol's _La Grand-maman_; she retired in 1876,
and died in 1897.