ARNO (anc. _Arnus_), a river of Italy which rises from the Monte
Falterona, about 25 m. E.N.E. of Florence, 4265 ft. above the sea. It
first runs S.S.E. through a beautiful valley, the Casentino; near Arezzo
it turns W., and at Montevarchi N.N.W.; 10 m. below it forces its way
through the limestone rock at Incisa and 10 m. farther on, at
Pontassieve, it is joined by the Sieve. Thence it runs westward to
Florence and through the gorge of Golfolina onwards to Empoli and Pisa,
receiving various tributaries in its course, and falls into the sea 7½
m. west of Pisa, after a total course of 155 m. In prehistoric times the
river ran straight on along the valley of the Chiana and joined the
Tiber near Orvieto; and there was a great lake, the north end of which
was at Incisa and the south at the lake of Chiusi. The distance from
Pisa to the mouth in the time of Strabo was only 2½ m. The Serchio (anc.
_Auser_), which joined the Arno at Pisa in ancient times, now flows into
the sea independently. The Arno is navigable for barges as far as
Florence; but it is liable to sudden floods, and brings down with it
large quantities of earth and stones, so that it requires careful
regulation. The most remarkable inundations were those of 1537 and 1740;
in the former year the water rose to 8 ft. in the streets of Florence.
The valley between Incisa and Arezzo contains accumulations of fossil
bones of the deer, elephant, rhinoceros, mastodon, hippopotamus, bear,
tiger, &c.