ARNOTT, NEIL (1788-1874), Scottish physician, was born at Arbroath on
the 15th of May 1788. He studied medicine first at Aberdeen, and
subsequently in London under Sir Everard Home (1756-1832), through whom
he obtained, while yet in his nineteenth year, the appointment of full
surgeon to an East Indiaman. After making two voyages to China he
settled in 1811 to practise in London, and speedily acquired high
reputation in his profession. Within a few years he was made physician
to the French and Spanish embassies, and in 1837 he became a physician
extraordinary to the queen. From his earliest youth Arnott had an
intense love of natural philosophy, and to this was added an
inventiveness which served him in good stead in his profession and
yielded the "Arnott water-bed," the "Arnott ventilator," the "Arnott
stove," &c. He was the author of several works bearing on physical
science or its applications, the most important being his _Elements of
Physics_ (1827), which went through six editions in his lifetime. In
1838 he published a treatise on _Warming and Ventilating_, and, in 1855,
one on the _Smokeless Fireplace_. He was a strong advocate of
scientific, as opposed to purely classical, education; and he manifested
his interest in natural philosophy by the gift of £2000 to each of the
four universities of Scotland and to the university of London, to
promote its study in the experimental and practical form. He died in
London on the 2nd of March 1874.