ARRIAN (FLAVIUS ARRIANUS), of Nicomedia in Bithynia, Greek historian and
philosopher, was born about A.D. 96, and lived during the reigns of
Hadrian, Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius. In recognition of his
abilities, he received the citizenship of both Athens and Rome. He was
greatly esteemed by Hadrian, who appointed him governor (_legatus_) of
Cappadocia (131-137), in which capacity he distinguished himself in a
campaign against the Alani. This is the only instance before the 3rd
century in which a first-rate Roman military command was given to a
Greek. Arrian spent a considerable portion of his time at Athens, where
he was archon 147-148. With his retirement or recall from Cappadocia his
official career came to an end. In his declining years, he retired to
his native place, where he devoted himself to literary work. He died
about 180. His biography, by Dio Cassius, is lost.

When young, Arrian was the pupil and friend of Epictetus, who had
probably withdrawn to Nicopolis, when Domitian expelled all philosophers
from Rome. He took verbatim notes of his teacher's lectures, which he
subsequently published under the title of _The Dissertations_ ([Greek:
Diatribai]), in eight books, of which the first four are extant and
constitute the chief authority for Stoic ethics, and _The Encheiridion_
(i.e. Manual) _of Epictetus_, a handbook of moral philosophy, for many
years a favourite instruction book with both Christians and pagans. It
was adapted for Christian use by St Nilus of Constantinople (5th
century), and Simplicius (about 550) wrote a commentary on it which we
still possess.

The most important of Arrian's original works is his _Anabasis of
Alexander_, in seven books, containing the history of Alexander the
Great from his accession to his death. Arrian's chief authorities were,
as he tells us, Aristobulus of Cassandreia and Ptolemy, son of Lagus
(afterwards king of Egypt), who both accompanied Alexander on his
campaigns. In spite of a too indulgent view of his hero's defects, and
some over-credulity, Arrian's is the most complete and trustworthy
account of Alexander that we possess.

Other extant works of Arrian are: _Indica_, a description of India in
the Ionic dialect, including the voyage of Nearchus, intended as a
supplement to the _Anabasis; Acies Contra Alanos_, a fragment of
importance for the knowledge of Roman military affairs; _Periplus of the
Euxine_, an official account written (131) for the emperor Hadrian;
_Tactica_, attributed by some to Aelianus, who wrote in the reign of
Trajan; _Cynegeticus_, a treatise on the chase, supplementing Xenophon's
work on the same subject; the _Periplus of the Erythraean Sea_,
attributed to him, is by a later compiler. Amongst his lost works may be
mentioned: [Greek: Ta mer Alexandron], a history of the period
succeeding Alexander, of which an epitome is preserved in Photius;
histories of Bithynia, the Alani and the Parthian wars under Trajan; the
lives of Timoleon of Syracuse, Dion of Syracuse and a famous brigand
named Timoleon. Arrian's style is simple, lucid and manly; but his
language, though pure, presents some peculiarities. He was called
"Xenophon the younger" from his imitation of that writer, and he even
speaks of himself as Xenophon.

  Complete works ed. F. Dubner (1846); _Anabasis_, C. Abicht (1889);
  with notes, C.W. Kniger (1835), C. Sintenis (1867) C. Abicht (1875);
  _Scripta Minora_, R. Hercher and A. Eberhard (1885), A.J. Roos, i.,
  containing the _Anabasis_ (Teubner series, 1907). English translations
  _Anabasis_, Rooke (1812), _Anabasis_ and _Indica_, E.J. Chinnock
  (1893); _Voyage of Nearchus_ with the spurious _Periplus_, W. Vincent
  (1807), J.W. M'Crindle (Calcutta, 1879), _Periplus of the Euxine_, W.
  Falconer (1805), Cynegettcus [W. Dansey] (1831). See also E. Bolla,
  _Arriano di Nicomedia_ (1890); E. Schwartz in Pauly-Wissowa's
  _Realencyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft_ (1896), H.F.
  Pelham, "Arrian as Legate of Cappadocia," in _English Historical
  Review_, October 1896; article GREECE: _History, ancient_,
  "Authorities."