ARRONDISSEMENT (from _arrondir_, to make round), an administrative
subdivision of a department in France. Dating nominally from 1800, the
arrondissement was really a re-creation of the "district" of 1790. It
comprises within itself the canton and the commune. It differs from the
department and from the commune in being merely an administrative
division and not a complete legal personality with power to acquire and
possess. The purposes for which it exists are, again, unlike those of
the department and the commune, comparatively limited. It is the
electoral district for the chamber of deputies, each arrondissement
returning one member; if the population is in excess of 100,000 it is
divided into two or more constituencies. It is also a judicial district
having a court of first instance. It is under the control of a
sub-prefect. There are 362 arrondissements in the 87 departments. Each
arrondissement has a council, with as many members as there are cantons,
whose function is to subdivide among the communes their _quota_ of the
direct taxes charged to the arrondissement by the general council of the
department. (See FRANCE) Somewhat different from the arrondissements of
the department are the arrondissements (20 in number) into which Paris
is divided. They bear a certain resemblance to the sub-municipalities
created in London by the London Government Act 1899, and each forms a
local administrative unit (see PARIS).

France is also subdivided, for purposes of defence, into five _maritime_
divisions, termed arrondissements. Instituted originally under the
Consulate, they were suppressed in 1815, but re-established again in
1826. They are under the direction of maritime prefects, who, by a
decree of 1875, must be vice-admirals in the navy.