ARSCHOT, PHILIPPE DE CROY, DUKE OF (1526-1595), governor-general of
Flanders, was born at Valenciennes, and inherited the estates of the
ancient and wealthy family of Croy. Becoming a soldier, he was made a
knight of the order of the Golden Fleece by Philip II., king of Spain,
and was afterwards employed in diplomatic work. He took part in the
troubles in the Netherlands, and in 1563 refused to join William the
Silent and others in their efforts to remove Cardinal Granvella from his
post. This attitude, together with Arschot's devotion to the Roman
Catholic Church, which he expressed by showing his delight at the
massacre of St Bartholomew, led Philip of Spain to regard him with still
greater favour, which, however, was withdrawn in consequence of
Arschot's ambiguous conduct when welcoming the new governor, Don John of
Austria, to the Netherlands in 1576. In spite, however, of his being
generally distrusted by the inhabitants of the Netherlands, he was
appointed governor of the citadel of Antwerp when the Spanish troops
withdrew in 1577. After a period of vacillation he deserted Don John
towards the end of that year. Jealous of the prince of Orange, he was
then the head of the party which induced the archduke Matthias
(afterwards emperor) to undertake the sovereignty of the Netherlands,
and soon afterwards was appointed governor of Flanders by the state
council. A strong party, including the burghers of Ghent, distrusted the
new governor; and Arschot, who was taken prisoner during a riot at
Ghent, was only released on promising to resign his office. He then
sought to regain the favour of Philip of Spain, and having been pardoned
by the king in 1580 again shared in the government of the Netherlands;
but he refused to serve under the count of Fuentes when he became
governor-general in 1594, and retired to Venice, where he died on the
11th of December 1595.

  See J.L. Motley, _The Rise of the Dutch Republic_.