ART SALES. The practice of selling objects of art by auction in England
dates from the latter part of the 17th century, when in most cases the
names of the auctioneers were suppressed. Evelyn (under date June 21,
1693) mentions a "great auction of pictures (_Lord Melford's_) in the
Banquetting House, Whitehall," and the practice is frequently referred
to by other contemporary and later writers. Before the introduction of
regular auctions the practice was, as in the case of the famous
collection formed by Charles I., to price each object and invite
purchasers, just as in other departments of commerce. But this was a
slow process, especially in the case of pictures, and lacked the
incentive of excitement. The first really important art collection to
come under the hammer was that of Edward, earl of Oxford, dispersed by
Cock, under the Piazza, Covent Garden, on 8th March 1741/2 and the five
following days, six more days being required by the coins. Nearly all
the leading men of the day, including Horace Walpole, attended or were
represented at this sale, and the prices varied from five shillings for
an anonymous bishop's "head" to 165 guineas for Vandyck's group of "Sir
Kenelm Digby, lady, and son." The next great dispersal was Dr Richard
Mead's extensive collection, of which the pictures, coins and gems, &c.,
were sold by Langford in February and March 1754, the sale realizing the
total, unprecedented up to that time, of £16,069. The thirty-eight days'
sale (1786) of the Duchess of Portland's collection is very noteworthy,
from the fact that it included the celebrated Portland vase, now in the
British Museum. Many other interesting and important 18th-century sales
might be mentioned. High prices did not become general until the
Calonne, Trumbull (both 1795) and Bryan (1798) sales. As to the quality
of the pictures which had been sold by auction up to the latter part of
the 18th century, it may be assumed that this was not high. The
importation of pictures and other objects of art had assumed extensive
proportions by the end of the 18th century, but the genuine examples of
the Old Masters probably fell far short of 1%. England was felt to be
the only safe asylum for valuable articles, but the home which was
intended to be temporary often became permanent. Had it not been for the
political convulsions on the continent, England, instead of being one of
the richest countries in the world in art treasures, would have been one
of the poorest. This fortuitous circumstance had, moreover, another
effect, in that it greatly raised the critical knowledge of pictures.
Genuine works realized high prices, as, for example, at Sir William
Hamilton's sale (1801), when Beckford paid 1300 guineas for the little
picture of "A Laughing Boy" by Leonardo da Vinci; and when at the
Lafontaine sales (1807 and 1811) two Rembrandts each realized 5000
guineas, "The Woman taken in Adultery," now in the National Gallery, and
"The Master Shipbuilder," now at Buckingham Palace. The Beckford sale of
1823 (41 days, £43,869) was the forerunner of the great art dispersal of
the 19th century; Horace Walpole's accumulation at Strawberry Hill, 1842
(24 days, £33,450), and the Stowe collection, 1848 (41 days, £75,562),
were also celebrated. They comprised every phase of art work, and in all
the quality was of a very high order. They acted as a most healthy
stimulus to art collecting, a stimulus which was further nourished by
the sales of the superb collection of Ralph Bernal in 1855 (32 days,
£62,690), and of the almost equally fine but not so comprehensive
collection of Samuel Rogers, 1856 (18 days, £42,367). Three years later
came the dispersal of the 1500 pictures which formed Lord Northwick's
gallery at Cheltenham (pictures and works of art, 18 days, £94,722).

Towards the latter part of the first half of the 19th century an
entirely new race of collectors gradually came into existence; they were
for the most part men who had made, or were making, large fortunes in
the various industries of the midlands and north of England and other
centres. They were untrammelled by "collecting" traditions, and their
patronage was almost exclusively extended to the artists of the day. The
dispersals of these collections began in 1863 with the Bicknell Gallery,
and continued at irregular intervals for many years, e.g. Gillott
(1872), Mendel (1875), Wynn Ellis and Albert Levy (1876), Albert Grant
(1877) and Munro of Novar (1878). These patrons purchased at munificent
prices either direct from the easel or from the exhibitions not only
pictures in oils but also water-colour drawings. As a matter of
investment their purchases frequently realized far more than the
original outlay; sometimes, however, the reverse happened, as, for
instance, in the case of Landseer's "Otter Hunt," for which Baron Grant
is said to have paid £10,000 and which realized shortly afterwards only
5650 guineas. One of the features of the sales of the 'seventies was the
high appreciation of water-colour drawings. At the Gillott sale (1872)
160 examples realized £27,423, Turner's "Bamborough Castle" fetching
3150 gns.; at the Quilter sale (1875) David Cox's "Hayfield," for which
a dealer paid him 50 gns. in 1850, brought 2810 gns. The following are
the most remarkable prices of later years. In 1895 Cox's "Welsh Funeral"
(which cost about £20) sold for 2400 gns., and Burne-Jones's
"Hesperides" for 2460 gns. In 1908, 13 Turner drawings fetched £12,415
(Acland-Hood sale) and 7 brought £11,077 (Holland sale), the
"Heidelberg" reaching 4200 gns. For Fred Walker's "Harbour of Refuge"
2580 gns. were paid (Tatham sale) and 2700 gns. for his "Marlow Ferry"
(Holland). The demand for pictures by modern artists, whose works sold
at almost fabulous prices in the 'seventies, has somewhat declined; but
during all its _furore_ there was still a small band of collectors to
whom the works of the Old Masters more especially appealed. The
dispersal of such collections as the Bredel (1875), Watts Russell
(1875), Foster of Clewer Manor (1876), the Hamilton Palace (17 days,
£397,562)--the greatest art sale in the annals of Great Britain--Bale
(1882), Leigh Court (1884), and Dudley (1892) resulted, as did the sale
of many minor collections each season, in many very fine works of the
Old Masters finding eager purchasers at high prices. A striking example
of the high prices given was the £24,250 realized by the pair of Vandyck
portraits of a Genoese senator and his wife in the Peel sale, 1900.

Since the last quarter of the 19th century the chief feature in art
sales has been the demand for works, particularly female portraits, by
Reynolds, his contemporaries and successors. This may be traced to the
South Kensington Exhibitions of 1867 and 1868 and the annual winter
exhibitions at Burlington House, which revealed an unsuspected wealth
and charm in the works of many English artists who had almost fallen
into oblivion. A few of the most remarkable prices for such pictures may
be quoted: Reynolds's "Lady Betty Delmé" (1894), 11,000 gns.; Romney's
"The Ladies Spencer" (1896), 10,500 gns.; Gainsborough's "Duchess of
Devonshire" (1876), 10,100 gns. (for the history of its disappearance
see GAINSBOROUGH, THOMAS), "Maria Walpole," 12,100 gns. (Duke of
Cambridge's sale, 1904); Constable's "Stratford Mill" (1895), 8500 gns.;
Hoppner's "Lady Waldegrave" (1906), 6000 gns.; Lawrence's "Childhood's
Innocence" (1907), 8000 gns.; Raeburn's "Lady Raeburn" (1905), 8500 gns.
Here may also be mentioned the 12,600 gns. paid for Turner's "Mortlake
Terrace" in 1908 (Holland sale).

The "appreciation" of the modern continental schools, particularly the
French, has been marked since 1880; of high prices paid may be mentioned
Corot's "Danse des Amours" (1898), £7200; Rosa Bonheur's "Denizens of
the Highlands" (1888), 5550 gns.; Jules Breton's "First Communion,"
£9100 in New York (1886); Meissonier's "Napoleon I. in the Campaign of
Paris," 12¼ in. by 9¼ in. (1882), 5800 gns., and "The Sign Painter"
(1891), 6450 gns. High prices are also fetched by pictures of Daubigny,
Fortuny, Gallait, Gérôme, Troyon and Israëls. The most marked feature of
late has been the demand for the 18th-century painters Watteau, Boucher,
Fragonard, Pater and Lancret; thus "La Ronde Champêtre" of the last
named brought £11,200 at the Say Sale in 1908, and Fragonard's "Le
Reveil de Vénus" £5520 at the Sedelmeyer sale, 1907.

"Specialism" is the one important development in art collecting which
has manifested itself since the middle of the 19th century. This
accounts for and explains the high average quality of the Wellesley
(1866), the Buccleuch (1888) and the Holford (1893) collections of
drawings by the Old Masters; for the Sibson Wedgwood (1877), the Duc de
Forli Dresden (1877), the Shuldham blue and white porcelain (1880), the
Benson collection of antique coins (1909), and for the objects of art at
the Massey-Mainwaring and Lewis-Hill sales of 1907. Very many other
illustrations in nearly every department of art collecting might be
quoted--the superb series of Marlborough gems (1875 and 1899) might be
included in this category but for the fact that it was formed chiefly in
the 18th century. The appreciation--commercially at all events--of
mezzotint portraits and of portraits printed in colours, after masters
of the early English school, was one of the most remarkable features in
art sales during the last years of the 19th century. The shillings of
fifty years before were then represented by pounds. The Fraser
collection (December 4 to 6, 1900) realized about ten times the original
outlay, the mezzotint of the "Sisters Frankland," after Hoppner, by W.
Ward, selling for 290 guineas as against 10 guineas paid for it about
thirty years previously. The H.A. Blyth sale (March 11 to 13, 1901, 346
lots, £21,717: 10s.) of mezzotint portraits was even more remarkable,
and as a collection it was the choicest sold within recent times, the
engravings being mostly in the first state. The record prices were
numerous, and, in many cases, far surpassed the prices which Sir Joshua
Reynolds received for the original pictures; e.g. the exceptionally fine
example of the first state of the "Duchess of Rutland," after Reynolds,
by V. Green, realized 1000 guineas, whereas the artist received only
£150 for the painting itself. Even this unprecedented price for a
mezzotint portrait was exceeded on the 30th of April 1901, when an
example of the first published state of "Mrs Carnac," after Reynolds, by
J.R. Smith, sold for 1160 guineas. At the Louis Huth sale (1905) 83 lots
brought nearly £10,000, Reynolds's "Lady Bampfylde" by T. Watson, first
state before letters, unpublished, fetching 1200 guineas. Such prices as
these and many others which might be quoted are exceptional, but they
were paid for objects of exceptional rarity or quality.

It is not necessary to pursue the chronicle of recent sales, which have
become a feature of every season. It is worth mentioning, however, that
the Holland sale, in June 1908, realized £138,118 (432 lots), a "record"
sum for a collection of pictures mainly by modern artists; and that for
the Rodolphe Kann collection (Paris) of pictures and objects of art,
including 11 magnificent Rembrandts, Messrs Duveen paid £1,000,000 in
1907. In every direction there has been a tendency to increase prices
for really great artistic pieces, even to a sensational extent. The
competition has become acute, largely owing to American and German
acquisitiveness. The demand for the finest works of art of all
descriptions is much greater than the supply. As an illustration of the
magnitude of the art sale business it may be mentioned that the
"turnover" of one firm in London alone has occasionally exceeded
£1,000,000 annually.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The chief compilations dealing with art sales in Great
  Britain are: G. Redford, _Art Sales_ (1888); and W. Roberts,
  _Memorials of Christie's_ (1897); whilst other books containing much
  important matter are W. Buchanan, _Memoirs of Painting_; _The Year's
  Art_ (1880 and each succeeding year); F.S. Robinson, _The
  Connoisseur_; and L. Soullie, _Les Ventes de tableaux, dessins et
  objets d'art au XIX^e siècle_ (chiefly French).