ARTA (_Narda_, i.e. [Greek: en Arda], or _Zarta_, i.e. [Greek: eis
Arta]), a town of Greece, in the province of Arta, 59 m. N.N.W. of
Mesolonghi. Pop. about 7000. It is built on the site of the ancient
Ambracia (q.v.), its present designation being derived from a corruption
of the name of the river Arachthus (Arta) on which it stands. This
enters the Gulf of Arta some distance south of the town. The river forms
the frontier between Greece and Turkey, and is crossed by a picturesque
bridge, which is neutral ground. There are a few remains of old
cyclopean walls. The town contains also a Byzantine castle, built on the
lofty site of the ancient citadel; a palace belonging to the Greek
metropolitan; a number of mosques, synagogues and churches, the most
remarkable being the church of the Virgin of Consolation, founded in
819. The streets of the town were widened and improved in 1869.
Manufacture of woollens, cottons, Russia leather and embroidery is
carried on, and there is trade in cattle, wine, tobacco, hemp, hides and
grain. Much of the neighbouring plain is very fertile, and the town is
surrounded with gardens and orchards, in which orange, lemon and citron
come to great perfection. In 1083 Arta was taken by Bohemund of
Tarentum; in 1449 by the Turks; in 1688 by the Venetians. In 1797 it was
held by the French, but in the following year, 1798, Ali Pasha of
Iannina captured it. During the Greek War of Independence it suffered
severely, and was the scene of several conflicts, in which the ultimate
success was with the Turks. An insurrection in 1854 was at once
repressed. It was ceded to Greece in 1881. In the Greco-Turkish War of
1897 the Greeks gained some temporary successes at Arta during April and
May.