ARTEMIDORUS. (1) A geographer "of Ephesus" who flourished about 100 B.C.
After studying at Alexandria, he travelled extensively and published the
results of his investigations in a large work on general geography
([Greek: Ta geographoumena]) in eleven books, much used by Strabo and
others. The original work is lost, but we possess many small fragments
and larger fragments of an abridgment made by Marcianus of Heracleia
(5th century), which contains the periplus of the Euxine and accounts of
Bithynia and Paphlagonia. (See Müller, _Geographi Graeci Minores_;
Bunbury, _History of Ancient Geography_; Stiehle, "Der Geograph
Artemidoros von Ephesos," in _Philologus_, xi., 1856). (2) A soothsayer
and interpreter of dreams, who flourished in the 2nd century A.D.,
during the reigns of Hadrian and the Antonines. He called himself
Daldianus from his mother's birthplace, Daldis in Lydia, in order to
make its name known to the world. His [Greek: Oneirokritica], or
interpretation of dreams, was said to have been written by command of
Apollo Daldianus, whose initiated votary he was. It is in four books,
with an appendix containing a collection of prophetic dreams which had
been realized. The first three books, addressed to Cassius Maximus, a
Phoenician rhetorician (perhaps identical with Maximus of Tyre), treat
of dreams and divination generally; the fourth--with a reply to his
critics--and the appendix are dedicated to his son, also named
Artemidorus and an interpreter of dreams. Artemidorus boasts of the
trouble expended on his work; he had read all the authorities on dreams,
travelled extensively, and conversed with all who had studied the
subject. The work is valuable as affording an insight into ancient
superstitions. According to Suidas, Artemidorus also wrote on augurs and
cheiromancy, but all trace of these works is lost. (Editions: Reiff,
1805, Hercher, 1864; translation and notes, Krauss, 1881; English
translation by Wood, 1644, and later editions.)