ARTHUR (Fr. _Artus_), the central hero of the cycle of romance known as
the _Matière de Bretagne_ (see ARTHURIAN LEGEND). Whether there was an
historic Arthur has been much debated; undoubtedly for many centuries
after the appearance of Geoffrey of Monmouth's _Historia Britonum_
(circ. 1136), the statements therein recorded of a mighty monarch, who
ruled over Britain in the 5th-6th centuries, and carried his conquests
far afield, even to the gates of Rome, obtained general, though not
universal, credence. Even in the 12th century there were some who
detected, and derided, the fictitious character of Geoffrey's "History."
As was naturally to be expected, the pendulum swung to the other
extreme, and in a more critical age the existence of Arthur was roundly
denied. The truth probably lies midway between the two. The words of
Wace, the Norman poet who translated the _Historia_ into verse, are here
admirably to the point. Speaking of the tales told of Arthur, he says:--

  "Ne tot mençunge, ne tot veir,
   Ne tot fable, ne tot saveir,
   Tant ont li contéor conté,
   Et li fabléor tant fablé
   Por lor contes embeleter
   Que tout ont fait fable sembler."[1]

The opinion now generally accepted by scholars is that the evidence of
Nennius, whose _Historia Britonum_ preceded that of Geoffrey by some 400
years, is in the main to be relied on. He tells us that Arthur was _Dux
bellorum_, and led the armies of the British kings against the Saxon
invaders, whom he defeated in twelve great battles. _Tunc Arthur
pugnabat cum regibus Britonum, sed ipse dux erat bettorum._

The traditional site of these battles covers a very wide area, and it is
supposed that Arthur held a post analogous to that of the general who,
under the Roman occupation, was known as _Comes Britanniae_, and held a
roving commission to defend the island wherever attacked, in
contradistinction to the _Dux Britanniarum_, who had charge of the
forces in the north, and the _Comes Littoris Saxonici_, whose task it
was to defend the south-east line. The Welsh texts never call Arthur
_gwledig_ (prince), but _amheradawr_ (Latin _imperator_) or emperor, a
title which would be bestowed on the highest official in the island. The
truth thus appears to be that, while there was never a _King_ Arthur,
there was a noted chieftain and general of that name. If we say that he
carried on a successful war against the Saxons, was probably betrayed by
his wife and a near kinsman, and fell in battle, we have stated all
which can be claimed as an historical nucleus for his legend. It is now
generally admitted that the representation of Arthur as world conqueror,
_Welt-Kaiser_, is due to the influence of the Charlemagne cycle. In the
12th century the _Matière de France_ was waning, the _Matière de
Bretagne_ waxing in popularity, and public opinion demanded that the
central figure of the younger cycle (for whatever the date of the
subject matter, as a literary cycle the Arthurian is the younger) should
not be inferior in dignity and importance to that of the earlier. When
we add to this the fact that the writers of the 12th century represented
the personages and events of the 6th in the garb, and under the
conditions, of their own time, we can understand the reason of the
manifold difficulties which beset the study of the cycle.

But into the figure of Arthur as we know him, other elements have
entered; he is not merely an historic personality, but at the same time
a survival of pre-historic myth, a hero of romance, and a fairy king;
and all these threads are woven together in one fascinating but
bewildering web. It is only possible here to summarize the leading
features which may be claimed as characteristic of each phase.

_Mythic._--Certain elements of the story point to Arthur as a culture
hero; as such his name has been identified with the _Mercurius Artaius_
of the Gauls. In this role he slays monsters, the boar Twrch Trwyth, the
giant of Mont St Michel and the Demon Cat of Losanne (André de Coutances
tells us that Arthur was really vanquished and carried off by the Cat,
but that one durst not tell that tale before Britons!). He never, it
should be noted, rides on purely chivalric ventures, such as aiding
distressed damsels, seeking the Grail, &c. His expeditions are all more
or less warlike. The story of his youth belongs, as Alfred Nutt
(_Folk-lore_, vol. iv.) has shown, to the group of tales classified as
the _Aryan Expulsion and Return_ formula, found in all Aryan lands.
Numerous parallels exist between the Arthurian and early Irish heroic
cycles, notably the Fenian or Ossianic. This Fenian cycle is very
closely connected with the Tuatha de Danaan, the Celtic deities of
vegetation and increase; recent research has shown that two notable
features of the Arthurian story, the Round Table and the Grail, can be
most reasonably accounted for as survivals of this Nature worship, and
were probably parts of the legend from the first.

_Romantic._--The character of Arthur as a romantic hero is, in reality,
very different from that which, mainly through the popularity of
Tennyson's _Idylls_, English people are wont to suppose. In the earlier
poems he is practically a lay figure, his court the point of departure
and return for the knights whose adventures are related in detail, but
he himself a passive spectator. In the prose romances he is a monarch,
the splendour of whose court, whose riches and generosity, are the
admiration of all; but morally he is no whit different from the knights
who surround him; he takes advantage of his _bonnes fortunes_ as do
others. He has two sons, neither of them born in wedlock; one, Modred,
is alike his son and his nephew. In certain romances, the _Perlesvaus_
and _Diu Crône_, he is a veritable _roi fainéant_, overcome by sloth and
luxury. Certain traits of his story appear to show the influence of
Northern romance. Such is the story of his begetting, where Uther takes
upon him the form of Gorlois to deceive Yguerne, even as Siegfried
changed shapes with Gunther to the undoing of Brünnhilde. The sword in
the perron (stone pillar or block), the withdrawal of which proves his
right to the kingdom, is the sword of the Branstock. Morgain carries him
off, mortally wounded, to Avalon, even as the Valkyr bears the Northern
hero to Valhal. Morgain herself has many traits in common with the
Valkyrie; she is one of nine sisters, she can fly through the air as a
bird (Swan maiden); she possesses a marvellous ointment (as does Hilde,
the typical Valkyr). The idea of a slumbering hero who shall awake at
the hour of his country's greatest need is world-wide, but the most
famous instances are Northern, e.g. Olger Danske and Barbarossa, and
depend ultimately on an identification with the gods of the Northern
Pantheon, notably Thor. W. Larminie cited an instance of a rhyme current
in the Orkneys as a charm against nightmare, which confuses Arthur with
Siegfried and his winning of the Valkyr.

_Fairy._--We find that at Arthur's birth (according to Layamon, who here
differs from Wace), three ladies appeared and prophesied his future
greatness. This incident is also found in the first continuation to the
_Perceval_, where the prediction is due to a lady met with beside a
forest spring, clearly here a water fairy. In the late romance of _La
Bataille de Loquifer_ Avalon has become a purely fairy kingdom, where
Arthur rules in conjunction with Morgain. In _Huon de Bordeaux_ he is
Oberon's heir and successor, while in the romance of _Brun de la
Montagne_, preserved in a unique MS. of the Bibliothèque Nationale, we
have the curious statement that all fairy-haunted places, wherever
found, belong to Arthur:--

  "Et touz ces lieux faés
   Sont Artus de Bretagne."

This brief summary of the leading features of the Arthurian tradition
will indicate with what confused and complex material we are here
dealing. (See also ARTHURIAN LEGEND, GRAIL, MERLIN, ROUND TABLE; and
CELT: _Celtic literature_.)

  _Texts_. Historic:--Nennius, _Historia Britonum_; H. Zimmer, _Nennius
  Vindicatus_ (Berlin, 1893), an examination into the credibility of
  Nennius; Geoffrey of Monmouth, _Historia Britonum_ (translations of
  both histories are in Bohn's Library); Wace, the _Brut_ (ed. by Leroux
  de Lincey); Layamon (ed. by Sir Fred. Madden).

  Romantic:--_Merlin_--alike in the Ordinary, or Vulgate (ed. Sommer),
  the _Suite_ or "Huth" _Merlin_, the 13th century _Merlin_ (ed. by G.
  Paris and J. Ulrich), and the unpublished and unique version of _Bibl.
  nat. fonds français_, 337 (cf. Freymond's analysis in _Zeitschrift für
  franz. Sprache_, xxii.)--devotes considerable space to the elaboration
  of the material supplied by the chronicles, the beginning of Arthur's
  reign, his marriage and wars with the Saxons. The imitation of the
  Charlemagne romances is here evident; the Saxons bear names of Saracen
  origin, and camels and elephants appear on the scene. The _Morte
  Arthur_, or _Mort au roi Artus_, a metrical romance, of which a unique
  English version exists in the Thornton collection (ed. for Early
  English Text Society), gives an expanded account of the passing of
  Arthur; in the French prose form it is now always found incorporated
  with the _Lancelot_, of which it forms the concluding section. The
  remains of the Welsh tradition are to be found in the _Mabinogion_
  (cf. Nutt's edition, where the stories are correctly classified), and
  in the Triads. Professor Rhys' _Studies in the Arthurian Legend_ are
  largely based on Welsh material, and may be consulted for details,
  though the conclusions drawn are not in harmony with recent research.
  These are the only texts in which Arthur is the central figure; in the
  great bulk of the romances his is but a subordinate rôle.
       (J. L. W.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] Nor all a lie, nor all true, nor all fable, nor all known, so
    much have the story-tellers told, and the fablers fabled, in order to
    embellish their tales, that they have made all seem fable.