ARTILLERY (the O. Fr. _artiller_, to equip with engines of war, probably
comes from Late Lat. _articulum_, dim. of _ars_, art, cf. "engine" from
_ingenium_, or of _artus_, joint), a term originally applied to all
engines for discharging missiles, and in this sense used in English in
the early 17th century. In a more restricted sense, artillery has come
to mean all firearms not carried and used by hand, and also the
_personnel_ and organization by which the power of such weapons is
wielded. It is, however, not usual to class _machine guns_ (q.v.) as
artillery. The present article deals with the development and
contemporary state of the artillery arm in land warfare, in respect of
its organization, personnel and special or "formal" employment. For the
_matériel_--the guns, their carriages and their ammunition--see ORDNANCE
and AMMUNITION. For _ballistics_, see that heading, and for the work of
artillery in combination with the other arms, see TACTICS.

Artillery, as distinct from ordnance, is usually classified in
accordance with the functions it has to perform. The simplest division
is that into _mobile_ and _immobile_ artillery, the former being
concerned with the handling of all weapons so mounted as to be capable
of more or less easy movement from place to place, the latter with that
of weapons which are installed in fixed positions. Mobile artillery is
subdivided, again chiefly in respect of its employment, into _horse_ and
_field_ batteries, _heavy field_ or _position_ artillery, _field
howitzers, mountain artillery_ and _siege trains_, adapted to every kind
of terrain in which field troops may be employed, and work they may have
to do. Immobile artillery is used in fixed positions of all kinds, and
above all in permanent fortifications; it cannot, therefore, be
classified as above, inasmuch as the _raison d'être_, and consequently
the armament of one fort or battery may be totally distinct from that of
another. "Fortress," "Garrison" and "Foot" artillery are the usual names
for this branch. The dividing line, indeed, in the case of the heavier
weapons, varies with circumstances; guns of position may remain on their
ground while elaborate fortifications grow up around them, or the
deficiencies of a field army in artillery may be made good from the
_matériel_, more frequently still from the _personnel_, of the fortress
artillery. Thus it may happen that mobile artillery becomes immobile and
vice versa. But under normal circumstances the principle of
classification indicated is maintained in all organized military forces.

HISTORICAL SKETCH

1. _Early Artillery._--Mechanical appliances for throwing projectiles
were produced early in the history of organized warfare, and "engines
invented by cunning men to shoot arrows and great stones" are mentioned
in the Old Testament. These were continually improved, and, under the
various names of _catapulta, balista, onager, trébuchet_, &c., were
employed throughout the ancient and medieval periods of warfare. The
machines finally produced were very powerful, and, even when a
propelling agent so strong as gunpowder was discovered and applied, the
supersession of the older weapons was not effected suddenly nor without
considerable opposition. The date of the first employment of cannon
cannot be established with any certainty, but there is good evidence to
show that the Germans used guns at the siege of Cividale in Italy
(1331). The terms of a commission given (1414) by Henry V. to his
_magister operationum, ingeniarum, et gunnarum ac aliarum ordinationum_,
one Nicholas Merbury, show that the organization of artillery
establishments was grafted upon that which was already in existence for
the service of the old-fashioned machines. Previously to this it is
recorded that of some 340 men forming the ordnance establishment of
Edward III. in 1344 only 12 were artillerymen and gunners. Two years
later, at Creçy, it is said, the English brought guns into the open
field for the first time. At the siege of Harfleur (1415) the ordnance
establishment included 25 "master gunners" and 50 "servitour gunners."
The "gunner" appears to have been the captain of the gun, with general
charge of the guns and stores, and the special duty of laying and firing
the piece in action.

2. _The Beginnings of Field Artillery._--It is clear, from such evidence
as we possess, that the chief and almost the only use of guns at this
time was to batter the walls of fortifications, and it is not until
later in the 15th century that their employment in the field became
general (see also CAVALRY). The introduction of field artillery may be
attributed to John Zizka, and it was in his Hussite wars (1419-1424)
that the _Wagenburg_, a term of more general application, but taken here
as denoting a cart or vehicle armed with several small guns, came into
prominence. This device allowed a relatively high manoeuvring power to
be attained, and it is found occasionally in European wars two centuries
later, as for instance at Wimpfen in 1622 and Cropredy Bridge in 1644.
In an act of attainder passed by the Lancastrian party against the
Yorkists (1459), it is stated that the latter were "traiterously ranged
in bataill ... their cartes with gonnes set before their batailles"
(Rot. Parl. 38 Henry VI., v. 348). In the London fighting of 1460, small
guns were used to clear the streets, heavy ordnance to batter the walls
of the Tower. The battle of Lose Coat Field (1469) was decided almost
entirely by Edward IV.'s field guns, while at Blackheath (1497) "some
cornets of horse, and bandes of foot, and good store of artillery
wheeling about" were sent to "put themselves beyond" the rebel camp
(Bacon, _Henry VII._). The greatest example of artillery work in the
15th century was the siege of Constantinople in 1453, at which the Turks
used a large force of artillery, and in particular some monster pieces,
some of which survived to engage a British squadron in 1807, when a
stone shot weighing some 700 lb. cut the mainmast of Admiral (Sir) J.T.
Duckworth's flagship in two, and another killed and wounded sixty men.
For siege purposes the new weapon was indeed highly effective, and the
castles of rebellious barons were easily knocked to pieces by the prince
who owned, or succeeded in borrowing, a few pieces of ordnance (cf.
Carlyle, _Frederick the Great_, book iii. chap. i.).

3. _The 16th Century._--In the Italian wars waged by Charles VIII.,
Louis XII. and Francis I. of France, artillery played a most conspicuous
part, both in siege and field warfare. Indeed, cannon did excellent
service in the field before hand firearms attained any considerable
importance. At Ravenna (1512) and Marignan (1515) field artillery did
great execution, and at the latter battle "the French artillery played a
new and distinguished part, not only by protecting the centre of the
army from the charges of the Swiss phalanxes, and causing them excessive
loss, but also by rapidly taking up such positions from time to time ...
as enabled the guns to play upon the flanks of the attacking columns"
(Chesney, _Observations on Firearms_, 1852). In this connexion it must,
however, be observed that, when the arquebus and other small arms became
really efficient (about 1525), less is heard of this small and handy
field artillery, which had hitherto been the only means of breaking up
the heavy masses of the hostile pikemen. We have seen that artillery was
not ignored in England; but, in view of the splendid and unique
efficiency of the archers, there was no great opportunity of developing
the new arm. In the time of Henry VIII., the ordnance in use in the
field consisted in the main of heavy _culverins_ and other guns of
position, and of lighter field pieces, termed _sakers, falcons_, &c. It
is to be noticed that already the lightest pieces had disappeared, the
smallest of the above being a 2-pounder. In the earlier days of field
artillery, the artillery train was a miscellaneous congeries of pontoon,
supply, baggage and tool wagons, heavy ordnance and light guns in carts.
With the development of infantry fire the use of the last-named weapons
died out, and it is largely due to this fact that "artillery" came to
imply cumbrous and immobile guns of position. Little is, therefore,
heard of smart manoeuvring, such as that at Marignan, during the latter
part of the 16th century. The guns now usually come into action in
advance of the troops, but, from their want of mobility, could neither
accompany a farther advance nor protect a retreat, and they were
generally captured and recaptured with every changing phase of the
fight. Great progress was in the meanwhile made in the adaptation of
ordnance to the attack and defence of fortresses and, in particular,
vertical fire came into vogue. A great Turkish gun, carrying a 600-lb.
stone shot, was used in the siege of Constantinople, apparently in this
way, since Gibbon records that at the range of a mile the shot buried
itself a fathom deep in earth, a fact which implies that a high angle of
elevation was given. In the celebrated siege of Malta in 1565 artillery
played a conspicuous part.

4. _The Thirty Years' War._--Such, in its broadest outlines, is the
history of artillery work during the first three centuries of its
existence. Whilst the material had undergone a very considerable
improvement, the organization remained almost unchanged, and the
tactical employment of guns had become restricted, owing to their
slowness and difficulty of movement on the march and immobility in
action. In wars of the type of the War of Dutch Independence and the
earlier part of the Thirty Years' War, this heavy artillery naturally
remained useful enough, and the _Wagenburg_ had given place to the
musketry initiated by the Spaniards at Bicocca and Pavia, which since
1525 had steadily improved and developed. It is not, therefore, until
the appearance of a captain whose secret of success was vigour and
mobility that the first serious attempt was made to produce field
artillery in the proper sense of the word, that is, a gun of good power,
and at the same time so mounted as to be capable of rapid movement. The
"carte with gonnes" had been, as is the modern machine gun, a mechanical
concentration of musketry rather than a piece of artillery. Maurice of
Nassau, indeed, helped to develop the field gun, and the French had
invented the limber, but Gustavus Adolphus was the first to give
artillery its true position on the battlefield. At the first battle of
Breitenfeld (1631) Gustavus had twelve heavy and forty-two light guns
engaged, as against Tilly's heavy 24-pounders, which were naturally far
too cumbrous for field work. At the Lech (1632) Gustavus seems to have
obtained a local superiority over his opponent owing to the handiness of
his field artillery even more than by its fire-power. At Lützen (1632)
he had sixty guns to Wallenstein's twenty-one. His field pieces were not
the celebrated "leather" guns (which were indeed a mere makeshift used
in Gustavus' Polish wars) but iron 4-pounders. These were distributed
amongst the infantry units, and thus began the system of "battalion
guns" which survived in the armies of Europe long after the conditions
requiring it had vanished. The object of thus dispersing the guns was
doubtless to ensure in the first place more certain co-operation between
the two arms, and in the second to exercise a military supervision over
the lighter and more useful field pieces which it was as yet impossible
to exercise over the _personnel_ of the heavy artillery.

5. _Personnel and Classification._--More than 300 years after the first
employment of ordnance, the men working the guns and the transport
drivers were still civilians. The actual commander of the artillery was
indeed, both in Germany and in England, usually a soldier, and Lennart
Torstensson, the commander of Gustavus' artillery, became a brilliant
and successful general. But the transport and the drivers were still
hired, and even the gunners were chiefly concerned for the safety of
their pieces, the latter being often the property, not of the king
waging war, but of some "master gunner" whose services he had secured,
and the latter's apprentices were usually in entire charge of the
material. These civilian "artists," as they were termed, owed no more
duty to the prince than any other employés, and even Gustavus, it would
appear, made no great improvement in the matter of the reorganization of
artillery trains. Soldiers as drivers do not appear until 150 years
later, and in the meanwhile companies of "firelocks" and "fusiliers"
(q.v.) came into existence, as much to prevent the gunners and drivers
from running away as to protect them from the enemy. A further cause of
difficulties, in England at any rate, was the age of the "gunners." In
the reign of Elizabeth, some of the Tower gunners were over ninety years
of age. Complaints as to the inefficiency of these men are frequent in
the years preceding the English Civil War. Gustavus, however, has the
merit of being the first to make the broad classification of artillery,
as mobile or non-mobile, which has since been almost universally in
force. In his time the 12-pounder was the heaviest gun classed as
mobile, and the "feildpeece" _par excellence_ was the 9-pounder or
_demi-culverin_. After the death of Gustavus at Lützen (1632), his
principles came universally into practice, and amongst them were those
of the employment of field artillery.

6. _The English Civil War._--Even in the English Civil War (Great
Rebellion), in which artillery was hampered by the previous neglect of a
century, its field work was not often contemptible, and on occasion the
arm did excellent service. But in the campaigns of this war, fought out
by men whose most ardent desire was to decide the quarrel swiftly, the
marching and manoeuvring were unusually rapid. The consequence of this
was that the guns were sometimes either late in arriving, as at
Edgehill, or absent altogether, as at Preston. The _rôle_ of guns was
further reduced by the fact that there were few fortresses to be
reduced, and country houses, however strong, rarely required to be
battered by a siege train. The New Model army usually sent for siege
guns only when they were needed for particular service. On such
occasions, indeed, the heavy ordnance did its work so quickly and
effectually that the assault often took place one or two days after the
guns had opened fire. Cromwell in his sieges made great use of shells,
12-inch and even larger mortars being employed. The castle of Devizes,
which had successfully resisted the Parliamentary battering guns,
succumbed at once to vertical fire. It does not, however, appear certain
that there was any separation of field from siege ordnance, although the
Swedish system was followed in almost all military matters.

7. _Artillery Progress, 1660-1740._--Cromwell's practice of relegating
heavy guns to the rear, except when a serious siege operation was in
view, and in very rapid movements leaving even the field pieces far
behind, was followed to some extent in the campaigns of the age of Louis
XIV. The number of ammunition wagons, and above all of horses, required
for each gun was four or five times as great as that required even for a
modern quick-firer. In the days of Turenne heavy guns were much
employed, as the campaigns of the French were directed as a rule to the
methodical conquest of territory and fortified towns. Similarly,
Marlborough, working amidst the fortresses of the Netherlands in 1706,
had over 100 pieces of artillery (of which 60 were mortars) to a force
of some 11,000 men, or about 9 pieces per 1000 men. On the other hand,
in his celebrated march to the Danube in 1704, he had but few guns, and
the allied armies at Blenheim brought into the field only 1 piece per
1000 men. At Oudenarde "from the _rapidity of the march_ ... the battle
was fought with little aid from artillery on either side" (Coxe,
_Marlborough_). There was less need now than ever before for rapid
manoeuvres of mobile artillery, since the pike finally disappeared from
the scene about 1700, and infantry fire-power had become the decisive
factor in battles. In the meantime, artillery was gradually ceasing to
be the province of the skilled workman, and assuming its position as an
arm of the military service. In the 17th century, when armies were as a
rule raised only "for the war" and disbanded at the conclusion of
hostilities, there had been no very pressing need for the maintenance in
peace of an expensive _personnel_ and material. Gunners therefore
remained, as civilians, outside the regular administration of the
forces, until the general adoption of the "standing army" principle in
the last years of the century (see ARMY). From this time steps were
taken, in all countries, to organize the artillery as a military force.
After various attempts had been made, the "Royal Regiment of Artillery"
came into existence in England in 1716. It is, however, stated that the
English artillery did not "begin to assume a military appearance until
the Flanders campaigns" of the War of the Austrian Succession. Even in
the War of American Independence a dispute arose as to whether a general
officer, whose regimental service had been in the Royal Artillery, was
entitled to command troops of all arms, and the artillery drivers were
not actually soldiers until 1793 at the earliest. French artillery
officers received military rank only in 1732.

8. _Artillery in the Wars of Frederick the Great._--By the time of
Frederick the Great's first wars, artillery had thus been divided into
(a) those guns moving with an army in the field, and (b) those which
were either wholly stationary or were called upon only when a siege was
expected. The _personnel_ was gradually becoming more efficient and more
amenable to discipline; the transport arrangements, however, remained in
a backward state. Siege and fortress artillery was now organized and
employed in accordance with the system of the "formal attack" as finally
developed by Vauban. For details of this, as involving the tactical
procedure of artillery in the attack and defence of fortresses, the
reader is referred to FORTIFICATION AND SIEGECRAFT. We are concerned
here more especially with the progress of field artillery. The part
played by this arm began now to vary according to the circumstances of
each action, and the "moral" support of guns was calculated as a factor
in the dispositions. In the early Silesian wars, heavy or reserve guns
protected the deployment of the army and endeavoured to prepare for the
subsequent advance by firing upon the hostile troops; the battalion guns
remained close to the infantry, accompanied its movements and assisted
in the fire fight. Their support was not without value, and the heavy
guns often provoked the enemy into a premature advance, as at Mollwitz.
But the infantry or the cavalry forced the decision. It has been
mentioned that with the final disappearance of the pike, about 1700,
infantry fire-power ruled the battlefield. Throughout the 18th century,
it will be found, when the infantry is equal to its work the guns have
only a subordinate part in the fighting of pitched battles. At
Kunersdorf (1759) the first dashing charge of the Prussian grenadiers
captured 72 guns from the Russian army. Later the total of captured
ordnance reached 180, yet the Russians, then almost wholly in flight,
were not cut to pieces, for only a few light guns of the Prussian army
could get to the front; their heavy pieces, though twelve horses were
harnessed to each, never came into action. This example will serve to
illustrate the difference between the artillery of 1760 and that of
fifty years later. According to Tempelhof, who was present, Kunersdorf
was the finest opportunity for field artillery that he had ever seen.
Yet the field artillery of the 18th century was, if anything, more
powerful than that of Napoleon's time; it was the want of mobility alone
which prevented the Prussians from turning to good account an
opportunity fully as favourable as that of the German artillery at
Sedan. That Frederick made more use of his guns in the later campaigns
of the Seven Years' War is accounted for by the fact that his infantry
and cavalry were no longer capable of forcing a decision, and also by
changes in the general character of the operations. These were fought in
and about broken country and entrenched positions, and the mobility of
the other arms sank to that of the artillery. Thus power came to the
front again, and the heavier weapons regained their former supremacy. In
a _bataille rangée_ in the open field the proportion of guns to men had
been, in 1741, 2 per 1000. At Leuthen (1757) heavy fortress guns were
brought to the front for a special purpose. At Kunersdorf the proportion
was 4 and 5 per 1000 men, with what degree of effectiveness we have
seen. In the later campaigns the Austrian artillery, which was,
throughout the Seven Years' War, the best in Europe, placed its numerous
and powerful ordnance (an "amphitheatre of 400 guns," as Frederick said)
in long lines of field works. The combination of guns and obstacles was
almost invariably too formidable to offer the slightest chance of a
successful assault. It was at this stage that Frederick, in 1759,
introduced horse artillery to keep pace with the movements of cavalry, a
proof, if proof were needed, of the inability of the field artillery to
manoeuvre. The field howitzer, the weapon _par excellence_ for the
attack of field works, has never perhaps been more extensively employed
than it was by the Prussians at that time. At Burkersdorf (1762)
Frederick placed 45 howitzers in one battery. In those days the mobile
artillery was always formed in groups or "batteries" of from 10 to 20
pieces. England too was certainly abreast of other countries in the
organization of the field artillery arm. About the middle of the 18th
century the guns in use consisted of 24-pounders, 12-pounders,
6-pounders and 3-pounders. The guns were divided into "brigades" of
four, five and six guns respectively, and began to be separated into
"heavy" and "light" brigades. Each field gun was drawn by four horses,
the two leaders being ridden by artillerymen, and had 100 rounds of shot
and 30 rounds of grape. The British artillery distinguished itself in
the latter part of the Seven Years' War. Foreign critics praised its
lightness, its elegance and the good quality of its materials. At
Marburg (1760) "the English artillery could not have been better served;
it followed the enemy with such vivacity, and maintained its fire so
well, that it was impossible for the latter to re-form," says Tempelhof,
the Prussian artillery officer who records the lost opportunity of
Kunersdorf. The merits and the faults of the artillery had been made
clear, and nowhere was the lesson taken to heart more than in France,
where General Gribeauval, a French officer who had served in the war
with the Austrian artillery, initiated reforms which in the end led to
the artillery triumphs of the Napoleonic era. While Frederick had
endeavoured to employ, as profitably as possible, the existing heavy
equipments, Gribeauval sought improvement in other directions.

9. _Gribeauval's Reforms._--At the commencement of the 18th century,
French artillery had made but little progress. The carriages and wagons
were driven by wagoners on foot, and on the field of battle the guns
were dragged about by ropes or remained stationary. Towards the middle
of the century some improvements were made. Field guns and carriages
were lightened, and the guns separated into brigades. Siege carriages
were introduced. From 1765 onwards, however, Gribeauval strove to build
up a complete system both of _personnel_ and _matériel_, creating a
distinct _matériel_ for field, siege, garrison and coast artillery.
Alive to the vital importance of mobility for field artillery, he
dismissed to other branches all pieces of greater calibre than
12-pounders, and reduced the weight of those retained. His reforms were
resisted, and for a time successfully; but in 1776 he became first
inspector-general of artillery, and was able to put his ideas into
force. The field artillery of the new system included 4-pounder
regimental guns, and for the reserve 8- and 12-pounders, with 6-inch
howitzers. For siege and garrison service Gribeauval adopted the
16-pounder and 12-pounder guns, 8-inch howitzer and 10-inch mortar, 12-,
10- and 8-inch mortars being introduced in 1785.

The carriages were constructed on a uniform model and technically
improved. The horses were harnessed in pairs, instead of in file as
formerly, but the manner in which the teams were driven remained much
the same. The _prolong_ (a sort of tow-rope) was introduced, to unite
the trail of the gun and the limber in slow retiring movements. Siege
carriages differed from those of field artillery only in details.
Gribeauval also introduced new carriages for garrison and coast service.
The great step made was in a uniform construction being adopted for all
_matériel_, and in making the parts interchangeable so far as possible.
In 1765 the _personnel_ of the French artillery was reorganized. The
corps or reserve artillery was organized in divisions of eight guns. The
battery or division was thus made a unit, with guns, munitions and
gunners complete, the horses and drivers being added at a later date.
Horse artillery was introduced into the French army in 1791. The last
step was made in 1800, when the establishment of a driver corps of
soldiers put an end to the old system of horsing by contract.

10. _British Artillery, 1793-1815._--Meanwhile the numbers of the
English artillery had increased to nearly 4000 men. For some five
centuries the word "artillery" in England meant entirely garrison
artillery; the field artillery only existed in time of war. When war
broke out, a train of artillery was organized, consisting of a certain
number of field (or siege) guns, manned by garrison gunners; and when
peace was proclaimed the train was disbanded, the _matériel_ being
returned into store, and the gunners reverting to some fort or
stronghold. In 1793 the British artillery was anything but efficient.
Guns were still dispersed among the infantry, mobility had declined
again since the Seven Years' War, and the American war had been fought
out by the other arms. The drivers were mere carters on foot with long
whips, and the whole field equipment was scarcely able to break from a
foot-pace. Prior to the Peninsular War, however, the exertions of an
able officer, Major Spearman, had done much to bring about improvement.
Horse artillery had been introduced in 1793, and the driver corps
established in 1794. Battalion guns were abolished in 1802, and field
"brigades of six guns" were formed, horse artillery batteries being
styled "troops." Military drivers were introduced, and the horses teamed
in pairs. The drivers were mounted on the near horses, the gunners
either rode the off horses or were carried on the limbers and wagons.
The equipment was lightened, and a new system of manoeuvres introduced.
A troop of horse artillery and a field brigade each had five guns and
one howitzer. The "driver corps," raised in 1794, was divided into
troops, the addition of one of which to a company of foot artillery
converted it into a field brigade. The horse artillery possessed both
drivers and horses, and required very limited assistance from the driver
corps.

11. _French Revolutionary Wars._--During the long wars of the French
Revolution and Empire the artillery of the field army by degrees became
field artillery as we know it to-day. The development of musketry in the
16th century had taken the work of preparing an assault out of the hands
of the gunners. _Per contra_, the decadence of infantry fire-power in
the latter part of the Seven Years' War had reinstated the artillery
arm. A similar decadence of the infantry arm was destined to produce, in
1807, artillery predominance, but this time with an important
difference, viz. _mobility_, and when mobility is thus achieved we have
the first modern field artillery. The new tactics of the French in the
Revolutionary wars, forced upon them by circumstances, involved an
almost complete abandonment of the fire-tactics of Frederick's day, and
the need for artillery was, from the first fight at Valmy onwards, so
obvious that its moral support was demanded even in the outpost line of
the new French armies. St Cyr (_Armies of the Rhine_, p. 112) quotes a
case in which "right in the very farthest outpost line" the original
4-pounder guns were replaced by 8-, 16-, and in the end by 24-pounders.
The cardinal principle of massing batteries was not, indeed, forgotten,
notwithstanding the weakness of raw levies. But though, as we have seen,
the _matériel_ had already been greatly improved, and the artillery was
less affected by the Revolution than other arms of the service,
circumstances were against it, and we rarely find examples of artillery
work in the Revolutionary wars which show any great improvement upon
older methods. The field guns were however, at last organized in
batteries each complete in itself, as mentioned above. The battalion gun
disappeared; it was a relic of days in which it was thought advisable,
both for other reasons and also because the short range of guns forbade
any attempt at concentration of fire from several positions at one
target, to have some force of artillery at any point that might be
threatened. Though it was officially retained in the regulations of the
French army, "officers and men combined to reject it" (Rouquerol, _Q.F.
Field Artillery_, p. 121), and its last appearances, in 1809 and in
1813, were due merely to an endeavour on the part of Napoleon to give
cohesion thereby to the battalions of raw soldiers which then
constituted his army. But, with the development of mobility, it was
probably found that sufficient guns could be taken to any threatened
point, and no one had ever denied the principle of massed batteries,
although, in practice, dispersion had been thought to be unavoidable.

12. _Napoleon's Artillery Tactics._--During the war the French artillery
steadily improved in manoeuvring power. But many years elapsed before
perfection was attained. Meanwhile, the infantry, handled without regard
to losses in every fight, had in consequence deteriorated. The final
production of the field artillery battle, usually dated as from the
battle of Friedland (June 14, 1807), therefore saved the situation for
the French. Henceforward Napoleon's battles depend for their success on
an "artillery preparation," the like of which had never been seen.
Napoleon's own maxim illustrates the typical tactics of 1807-1815. "When
once the _melée_ has begun," he says, "the man who is clever enough to
bring up an unexpected force of artillery, without the enemy knowing it,
is sure to carry the day." The guns no longer "prepared" the infantry
advance by slowly disintegrating the hostile forces. Still less was it
their business merely to cover a deployment. On the contrary, they now
went in to the closest ranges and, by actually _annihilating_ a portion
of the enemy's line with case-shot fire, "covered" the assault so
effectively that columns of cavalry and infantry reached the gap thus
created without striking a blow. It is unnecessary to give examples.
Every one of Napoleon's later battles illustrates the principle. The
most famous case is that of the great battery of 100 guns at Wagram
(q.v.) which preceded the final attack of the centre. When Napoleon at
Leipzig saw the allied guns forming up in long lines to prepare the
assault, he exclaimed, "At last they have learned something." This
"case-shot preparation," of course, involved a high degree of efficiency
in manoeuvre, as the guns had to gallop forward far in front of the
infantry. The want of this quality had retarded the development of field
artillery for 300 years, during which it had only been important
relatively to the occasional inferiority of other troops. After
Napoleon's time the art of tactics became the art of _combining the
three arms_.

[Illustration: PLATE I.

  FIGS. 1 and 2.--15th Century Field Artillery (Napoleon III).

  FIG. 3.--Field Artillery. 1525 (Napoleon III).

  FIG. 4.--French Artillery 1735 (_Journal d'Armée_,1835).

  FIG. 5.--French Field Artillery,1835 (_Journal d'Armée_,1835).

  FIG. 6.--Artillery in Action, Roveredo, 1796 (C. Vernet).]

[Illustration: PLATE II.

  BREACH LOADING FIELD BATTERY (15-PR. B.L.).
  _Photo, Gale & Polden._

  QUICK-FIRING HORSE ARTILLERY (ROYAL HORSE ARTILLERY, 13-PR. Q.F.).
  _Photo, Gale & Polden._

  Q.F. FIELD ARTILLERY (18-PR. Q.F., R.F.A.).
  _Photo, Gale & Polden._

  FRENCH (75-MM. Q.F.) FIELD ARTILLERY MANOEUVRING.
  _Photo, Topical Press._]

13. _Artillery, 1815-1865._--Henceforward, therefore, the history of
artillery becomes the history of its technical effectiveness,
particularly in relation to infantry fire, and of improvements or
modifications in the method of putting well-recognized principles into
action. Infantry fire, however, being more variable in its effectiveness
than that of artillery, the period 1815-1870 saw many changes in the
relations of the two arms. In the time of Napoleon, infantry fire never
equalled that of the Seven Years' War, and after the period of the great
wars the musket was less and less effectively used. Economy was,
however, practised to excess in every army of Europe during the period
1815-1850, and even if there had been great battles at this time, the
artillery, which was maintained on a minimum strength of guns, men and
horses, would not have repeated the exploits of Sénarmont and Drouot in
the Napoleonic wars. The principle was well understood, but under such
conditions the practice was impossible. It was at this stage that the
general introduction of the rifled musket put an end, once for all,
to the artillery tactics of the smooth-bore days. Infantry, armed with a
far-ranging rifle, as in the American Civil War, kept the guns beyond
case-shot range, compelling them to use only round shot or common shell.
In that war, therefore, attacking infantry met, on reaching close
quarters, not regiments already broken by a _feu d'enfer_, but the full
force of the defenders' artillery and infantry, both arms fresh and
unshaken, and the full volume of their case shot and musketry. At
Fredericksburg the Federal infantry attacked, unsupported by a single
field piece; at Gettysburg the Federal artillery general Hunt was able
to reserve his ammunition to meet Lee's assault, although the infantry
of his own side was meanwhile subjected to the fire of 137 Confederate
guns. Thus, in both these cases the assault became one of infantry
against unshaken infantry and artillery. On many occasions, indeed, the
batteries on either side went into close ranges, as the traditions of
the old United States army dictated, but their losses were then totally
out of proportion to their effectiveness. Indeed, the increased range at
which battles were now fought, and the ineffectiveness of the
projectiles necessarily used by the artillery at these ranges, so far
neutralized even rifled guns that artillery generals could speak of
"idle cannonades" as the "besetting sin" of some commanders.

14. _The Franco-German War, 1870-71._--In the next great war, that of
1866 (Bohemia), guns were present on both sides in great numbers, the
average for both sides being three guns per 1000 men. Artillery,
however, played but a small part in the Prussian attacks, this being due
to the inadequate training then afforded, and also to the mixture of
rifled guns and smooth-bores in their armament. In Prussia, however, the
exertions of General v. Hindersin, the improvement of the _matériel_,
and above all the better tactical training of the batteries, were
rewarded four years later by success on the battlefield almost as
decisive as Napoleon's. In 1870 the French artillery was invariably
defeated by that of the Germans, who were then free to turn their
attention to the hostile infantry. At first, indeed, the German infantry
was too impatient to wait until the victorious artillery had prepared
the way for them by disintegrating the opposing line of riflemen. Thus
the attack of the Prussian Guards at St Privat (August 18, 1870) melted
away before the unbroken fire-power of the French, as had that of the
Federals at Fredericksburg and that of the Confederates at Gettysburg.
But such experiences taught the German infantry commanders the necessity
of patience, and at Sedan the French army was enveloped by the fire of
nearly 600 guns, which did their work so thoroughly that the Germans
annihilated the Imperial army at the cost of only 5% of casualties.

15. _Results of the War._--The tactical lessons of the war, so far as
field artillery is concerned, may be briefly summarized as (a)
employment of great masses of guns; (b) forward position of guns in the
order of march, in order to bring them into action as quickly as
possible; (c) the so-called "artillery duel," in which the assailant
subdues the enemy's artillery fire; and (d) when this is achieved, and
not before, the thorough preparation of all infantry attacks by
artillery bombardment. This theory of field artillery action has not,
even with the almost revolutionary improvements of the present period,
entirely lost its value, and it may be studied in detail in the
well-known work of von Schell, _Taktik der Feldartillerie_ (1877), later
translated into English by Major-General Sir A.E. Turner (_Tactics of
Field Artillery_, 1900). In one important matter, however, the precepts
of Schell and his contemporaries no longer hold good. "It is absolutely
necessary that the object of the infantry's attack should be cannonaded
before it advances. To accomplish this, sufficient time should be given
to the artillery, and on no account should the infantry be ordered to
advance until the fire of the guns has produced the desired effect."
This, the direct outcome of the slaughter at St Privat, represents the
best possibilities of breech-loading guns with common shell--no more
than a slow disintegration of the enemy's power of resistance by a
thorough and lengthy "artillery preparation." Against troops sheltered
behind works (as in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78) the common shell
usually failed to give satisfactory results, if for no other reason,
because the "preparation" consumed an inordinate time, and in any case
the hostile artillery had first of all to be subdued in the artillery
duel.

16. _Quick-firing Field Guns._--In 1891, a work by General Wille of the
German army (_The Field Gun of the Future_) and in 1892 another by
Colonel Langlois of the French service (_Field Artillery with the other
Arms_) foreshadowed many revolutionary changes in _matériel_ and tactics
which have now taken place. The new ideas spread rapidly, and the
quick-firing gun came by degrees to be used in every army. The original
designs have been greatly improved upon (see ORDNANCE: _Field artillery
equipments_), but the principles of these designs have not undergone
serious modification. These are, briefly, the mechanical absorption of
the recoil, by means of brakes or buffers, and the development of "time
shrapnel" as the projectile of field artillery. The absorption of recoil
of itself permits of a higher rate of fire, since the gun does not
require to be run up and relaid after every shot. Formerly such an
advantage was illusory (since aim could not be taken through the thick
bank of smoke produced by rapid fire), but the introduction of smokeless
powder removed this objection. Artillerists, no longer handicapped, at
once turned their attention to the increase of the rate of fire. At the
same time a shield was applied to the gun, for the protection of the
detachment. This advantage is solely the result of the non-recoiling
carriage. The gunners had formerly to stand clear of the recoiling gun,
and a shield was therefore of but slight value.

17. _Time Shrapnel._--The power of modern artillery owes even more to
the improvement of the projectile than to that of the gun (see
AMMUNITION). The French, always in the forefront of artillery progress,
were the first nation to realize the new significance of the time-fuze
and the shrapnel shell. These had been in existence for many years; to
the British army are due both the invention and the development of the
shrapnel, which made its first appearance in European warfare at Vimeira
in 1808. But, up to the introduction of rifled pieces, the Napoleonic
case-shot attack was universally and justly considered the best method
of fighting, and in the transition stage of the _matériel_ many soldiers
continued to put faith in the old method,--hence the Prussian artillery
in 1866 had many smooth-bore batteries in the field,--and between 1860
and 1870 gunners, now convinced of the superiority of the new
equipments, undoubtedly sought to turn to account the minute accuracy of
the rifled weapons in unnecessarily fine shooting. Thus, in 1870 the
French time-fuze was only graduated for two ranges, and the Germans used
percussion fuzes only. But this phase has passed, and General Langlois
has summarized the tactics of the newest field artillery in one phrase:
"It results in transferring to 3000 yds. the point-blank and case-shot
fire of the smooth-bore." The meaning of this will be discussed later;
here it will be sufficient to say that it is claimed for the modern gun
and the modern shell that the Napoleonic method[1] of annihilating by a
rain of bullets has been revived, with the distinction that the shell,
and not the gun, fires the bullets close up to the enemy. In the Boer
War, Pieter's Hill furnished a notable example of this "covering," as
distinct from "preparation," of an assault by artillery fire.

18. _Heavy Field, Siege and Garrison Artillery._--Amongst other results
of this war was a recrudescence of the idea of "dispersion." This will
be noticed later; the more material result of the Boer War, and of the
generally increasing specialization in the various functions of the
artillery arm, has been the reintroduction of heavy ordnance into field
armies. The field howitzer reappeared some time before the outbreak of
that war, and the British howitzers had illustrated their shell-power in
the Sudan campaign of 1898. During the latter part of the 19th century,
siege and fortress artillery underwent a development hardly less
remarkable than that of field artillery in the same time. Rifled guns,
"long" and "short" for direct and curved fire, formed the siege
artillery of the Germans in 1870-71, and with the reduction of the
old-fashioned fortresses of France began a new era in siegecraft (see
FORTIFICATION AND SIEGECRAFT). At the present time howitzers[2] (B.L.
rifled) are the principal siege weapons, while heavy direct-fire guns
(see ORDNANCE _passim_) still retain a part of the work formerly
assigned to the artillery of the attack. For an account of a siege with
modern artillery see Macalik and Länger, _Kampf um eine Festung_, which
describes an imaginary siege of Königgrätz. On the whole, it may be said
that modern artillery has caused a revolution in methods of
fortification and siegecraft, which is little less far-reaching than the
original change from the trébuchet to the bombard.

ORGANIZATION

19. _Field Artillery Organization._--A _battery_ of field artillery
comprises three elements, viz. _matériel_,--guns, carriages, ammunition
and stores; _personnel_,--officers, non-commissioned officers, gunners,
drivers and artificers; and _transport_,--almost invariably horses,
though other animals, and also motor and mechanical transport, are used
under special circumstances. As for the _matériel_, the guns used by
field artillery in almost all countries are quick-firers, throwing
shells of 13 to 18 pounds; details of these will be found in the article
ORDNANCE. The number of guns in a battery varies in different countries
between four and eight; by far the most usual number is six. With the
introduction of the quick-firing gun, the tendency towards small
batteries (of four guns) has become very pronounced, the ruling motives
being (a) better control of fire in action, and (b) more horses
available to draw the increased number of ammunition wagons required.
"Mixed" batteries of guns and howitzers were formerly employed on
occasion, and were supposed to be adapted to every kind of work.
However, the difference between the gun and the howitzer was so great
that at all times one part of the armament was idle, while the general
increase in the artillery arm has permitted batteries and brigades of
howitzers to be formed, separately, as required. Machine guns (q.v.) are
not treated in Great Britain as being artillery weapons, though abroad
they are often organized in batteries. During, and subsequent to the
Boer War, heavier machine guns, called pompoms, came into use. The
rocket (q.v.), formerly a common weapon of the artillery, is now used,
if at all, only for mountain and forest warfare against savages.

20. _Ammunition._--The vehicles of a battery include (besides guns and
limbers) ammunition wagons, store and provision carts or wagons and
forage wagons. On the amount of ammunition that should be carried with a
field battery there was formerly a considerable diversity of opinion.
The greater the amount a battery carries with it, the more independent
it is; on the other hand, every additional wagon makes the battery more
cumbrous and, by lengthening out the column, keeps back the combatant
troops marching in rear. But since the introduction of the Q.F. gun it
has been universally recognized that the gun must have a very liberal
supply of ammunition present with it in action, and the old standard
allowance of one wagon per gun has been increased to that of two and
even three. Formerly batteries were further hampered by having to carry
the reserve of small-arm ammunition for infantry and cavalry. But the
greater distances of modern warfare accentuate the difficulties of such
a system, and the reserve ammunition for all arms is now carried in
special "ammunition columns" (see AMMUNITION), the _personnel_ and
transport of which is furnished by the artillery.

21. _Interior Economy._--The organization and interior economy of a
battery is much the same in all field artillery. In England the command
is held by a major, the second in command is a captain. The battery is
divided into three "sections" of two guns each, each under a subaltern
officer, who is responsible for everything connected with his
section--men, horses, guns, carriages, ammunition and stores. Each
section again consists of two sub-sections, each comprising one gun and
its wagons, men and horses, and at the head of each is the "No. 1" of
the gun detachment--usually a sergeant--who is immediately responsible
to the section commander for his sub-section.

The No. 1 rides with the gun, there is also another mounted
non-commissioned officer who rides with the first wagon, and the gunners
are seated on the gun-carriage, wagon and limbers. The increased number
of wagons now accompanying the gun has, however, given more seating
accommodation to the detachment, and this distribution has in some cases
been altered. The three drivers ride the near horses of their respective
pairs, each gun and each wagon being drawn by six horses. On the march,
the gun is attached to the limber, a two-wheeled carriage drawn by the
gun team; the wagon consists likewise of a "body" and a limber. A
battery has also a number of non-combatant carriages, such as forge and
baggage wagons. In addition to the gunners and drivers, there are men
specially trained in range-taking, signalling, &c., in all batteries.

22. _Special Natures of Field Artillery._--_Horse Artillery_ differs
from field in that the whole gun detachment is mounted, and the gun and
wagon therefore are freed from the load of men and their equipment. The
organization of a battery of horse artillery differs but slightly from
that of a field battery; it is somewhat stronger in rank and file, as
horse-holders have to be provided for the gunners in action. Horse
artillery is often lightened, moreover, by sacrificing power (see
ORDNANCE). The essential feature of _Mountain Artillery_ in general is
the carrying of the whole equipment on the backs of mules or other
animals. The total weight is usually distributed in four or five
mule-loads. For action the loads are lifted off the saddles and
"assembled," and the time required to do this is, in well-trained
batteries, only one minute. For the technical questions connected with
the gun and its carriage, see ORDNANCE. The weight of a shell in a
mountain gun rarely exceeds 12 lb., and is usually less. In most armies
the _field howitzer_ has, after an eclipse of many years, reasserted its
place. The weapons used are B.L. or Q.F. howitzers on field carriages;
the calibre varies from about 4 to 5 in. In Great Britain the field
howitzer batteries are organized as, and form part of, the Royal Field
Artillery, two batteries of six howitzers each forming a brigade.

23. _Heavy Ordnance._--_Heavy Field Artillery_, officially defined as
"all artillery equipped with mobile guns of 4-in. calibre and upwards,"
is usually composed, in Great Britain, of 5-in. or 4.7-in. Q.F. guns on
field carriages. 6-in. Q.F. guns have also been used. A battery (4 guns)
is attached to the divisional artillery of each division, a company of
the Royal Garrison Artillery furnishing the _personnel_. The four guns
are divided into two sections, each section under an officer and each
subsection under a non-commissioned officer, as in the horse and field
batteries. _Siege_ and _garrison artillery_ have not usually the
complete and permanent organization that distinguishes field artillery.
For siege trains the _matériel_ is usually kept in store, and the
_personnel_ and transport are supplied from other sources according to
requirement. In garrison artillery, the guns mounted in fortresses and
batteries, or stored in arsenals for the purpose, furnish the
_matériel_, and the companies of garrison artillery the _personnel_. In
Great Britain, the Royal Garrison Artillery finds the mountain batteries
and the heavy field artillery in addition to its own units. The siege
trains are, as has been said, organized _ad hoc_ on each particular
occasion (see FORTIFICATION AND SIEGECRAFT). In Great Britain, the guns
and howitzers manned by the R.G.A. would be 6-in. and 8-in. howitzers,
4.7-in. and 6-in. guns, and still heavier howitzers, as well as the
field and heavy batteries belonging to the divisions making the siege.

24. _Higher Organization of Artillery._--The higher units, in almost
every country except Great Britain, are the regiment, and, sometimes,
the brigade of two or more regiments. These units are distributed to
army corps, divisions and districts, in the same way as units of other
arms (see ARMY). In Great Britain the Royal Regiment of Artillery still
comprises the whole _personnel_ of the arm, being divided into the Royal
Horse, Royal Field and Royal Garrison Artillery; to each branch Special
Reserve and Territorial artillery are affiliated. Over and above the
military command of these higher units, provision is usually made for
technical control of the _matériel_, and a variety of training and
experimental establishments, such as schools of gunnery, are maintained
in all countries. The more special unit of organization in mobile
artillery is the _brigade_, formerly called brigade-division (German,
_Abteilung_; French _groupe_). The brigade is in Great Britain the
administrative and tactical unit. Mountain artillery is not organized in
brigades in the British empire. The unit consists, in the case of guns,
of three batteries (18 guns, heavy artillery 12), in the case of field
howitzers of two batteries (12 howitzers), and in the horse artillery of
two batteries (12 guns), and is commanded by a lieutenant-colonel. To
each brigade is allotted an ammunition column. The necessity for such a
grouping of batteries will be apparent if the reader notes that 54 field
guns, 12 howitzers and 4 heavy field guns form the artillery of a single
British division of about 15,000 combatants.

25. _Grouping of the Artillery._--The "corps artillery" (formerly the
"reserve artillery") now consists only of the howitzer and heavy
brigades, with a brigade of horse artillery. The latter is held at the
disposal of the corps commander for the swift reinforcement of a
threatened point; the howitzers and the heavy guns have, of course,
functions widely different from those of the mass of guns. As the field
artillery is required to come into action at the earliest possible
moment, it has now been distributed amongst the infantry divisions, and
marches almost at the head of the various combatant columns, instead of
being relegated perhaps to the tail of the centre column. The
redistribution of the British army (1907) on a divisional basis is a
remarkable example of this; even the special natures of artillery
(except horse artillery) are distributed amongst the divisions. In
Germany two "regiments" (each of 2 _Abteilungen_ = 6 batteries) form a
brigade, under an artillery general in each division who thus disposes
of 72 field guns, and the howitzers, with such horse artillery batteries
as remain over after the cavalry has been supplied, still form a corps
or reserve artillery. In 1903 the French, after long hesitation,
assigned the whole of the field artillery to the various divisions, but
later (for reasons stated in the article TACTICS) arranged to
reconstitute the old-fashioned corps artillery in war. (See also ARMY, §
49).

TACTICAL WORK

26. _General Characteristics of Field Artillery Action._--The duty of
field artillery in action is to fire with the greatest effect on the
target which is for the moment of the greatest tactical importance. This
definition of field artillery tactics brings the student at once to
questions of combined tactics, for which consult the article TACTICS.
The purpose of the present article is to indicate the methods employed
by the gunners to give effect to their fire at the targets mentioned.
For this purpose the artillery has at its disposal two types of
projectile, common (or rather, high explosive) shell and shrapnel, and
two fuzes, "time" and "percussion" (see AMMUNITION). The actual process
of coming into action may be described in a few words. The gun is, at or
near its position in action, "unlimbered" and the gun limber and team
sent back under cover. Ammunition for the gun is first taken from the
wagon that accompanies it, as it is very desirable to keep the limbers
full as long as possible, in case of emergencies such as that of a
temporary separation from the wagon. Limber supply is, however, allowed
in certain circumstances. The wagon is now placed as a rule by the side
of the gun, an arrangement which immensely simplifies the supply of
ammunition, this being done under cover of the armour on the wagon and
of the gun-shield and also without fatigue to the men. The older method
of placing the wagon at some distance behind the gun is still
occasionally used, especially in the case of unshielded equipments. No
horses are allowed, in any case, to be actually with the line of guns.
According to the British _Field Artillery Training_ of 1906, a battery
in action would be thus distributed: first, the "fighting battery"
consisting of the six guns, each with its wagon alongside, and the
limbers of the two flank guns; then, under cover in rear, the "first
line of wagons" comprising the teams of the fighting battery, the four
remaining gun limbers, and six more wagons. The non-combatant vehicles
form the "second line of wagons."

27. _Occupation of a Position._--This depends primarily upon
considerations of tactics, for the accurate co-operation of the guns is
the first essential to success in the general task. In details, however,
the choice of position varies to some extent with the nature of the
equipment: for instance, an elevated position is better adapted than a
low one for high velocity guns firing over the heads of their own
infantry, and again, the "spade" with which nearly all equipments are
furnished (see ORDNANCE) should have soil in which it can find a hold.
Cover for the gun and its detachment cannot well be obtained from the
configuration of the ground, because, if the gun can shoot over the
covering mass of earth, the hostile shells can of course do likewise.
Sufficient protection is given by the shield, and thus "cover" for
field-guns simply means concealment. Cover for the "first line of
wagons" is, however, a very serious consideration. As to concealment, it
is stated that "the broad white flash from a gun firing smokeless powder
is visible" to an enemy "unless the muzzle is at least 10 ft. below the
covering crest" (Bethell, _Modern Guns and Gunnery_, 1907, p. 147).
Concealment therefore, means only the skilful use of ground in such a
way as to make the enemy's ranging difficult. This frequently involves
the use of retired positions, on reverse slopes, in low ground, &c., and
in all modern artillery the greatest stress is laid on practice in
firing by indirect means. Controversy has, however, arisen as to whether
inability to see the foreground is not a drawback so serious that direct
fire from a crest position, in spite of its exposure, must be taken as
the normal method. The latter is of course immensely facilitated by the
introduction of the shield. A great advantage of retired positions is
that, provided unity of direction is kept, an overwhelming artillery
surprise (see _F.A. Training_, 1906, p. 225) is carried out more easily
than from a visible position. The extent of _front_ of a battery in
action is governed by the rule that no two gun detachments should be
exposed to being hit by the bullets of one shell, and also by the
necessity of having as many guns as possible at work. These two
conditions are met by the adoption of a 20-yards interval between the
muzzles of the guns. At the present time the gun and its wagon are
placed as close together as possible, to obtain the full advantage of
the armoured equipment. The _shield_, behind which the detachments
remain at all times covered from rifle (except at very short range) and
shrapnel bullets,[3] enables the artillery commander to handle his
batteries far more boldly than formerly was the case. General Langlois
says "the shield-protected carriage is the corollary to the quick-firing
gun." Armour on the wagon, enabling ammunition supply as well as the
service of the gun, to be carried on under cover, soon followed the
introduction of the shield. The disadvantage of extra weight and
consequently increased difficulty of "man-handling" the equipment is
held to be of far less importance than the advantages obtained by the
use of armour.

28. _Laying._--"Elevation" may be defined as the vertical inclination of
the gun, "direction" as the horizontal inclination to the right or left,
necessary to direct the path of the projectile to the object aimed at.
"Laying" the gun, in the case of most modern equipments, is divided, by
means of the device called the independent line of sight (see ORDNANCE),
into two processes, performed simultaneously by different men, the
adjustment of the sights and that of the gun. The first is the act of
finding the "line of sight," or line joining the sights and the point
aimed at; for this the equipment has to be "traversed" right or left so
as to point in the proper direction, and also adjusted in the vertical
plane. The simplest form of laying for direction, or "line," is called
the "direct" method. If the point aimed at is the target, and it can be
seen by the layer, he has merely to look over the "open" sights. But the
point aimed at is rarely the target itself. In war, the target, even if
visible, is often indistinct, and in this case, as also when the guns
are under cover or engaging a target under cover, an "aiming point" or
"auxiliary mark," a conspicuous point quite apart and distinct from the
target, has to be employed ("indirect" method). In the Russo-Japanese
War the sun was sometimes used as an aiming point. When the guns are
behind cover and the foreground cannot be seen, an artificial aiming
point is often made by placing a line of "aiming posts" in the ground.
If an aiming point can be found which is in line with the target, as
would be the case when aiming posts are laid out, the laying is simple,
but it is as often as not out of the line. Finding the "line" in this
case involves the calculation, from a distant observing point, of the
angle at which the guns must be laid in order that, when the sights are
directed upon the aiming point, the shell will strike the target. It is
further necessary to find the "angle of sight" or inclination of the
line of sight to the horizontal plane. If aim be taken over the open
sights at the target, the line of sight naturally passes through the
target, but in any other case it may be above or below it. Then the
point where the projectile will meet the line of sight, which should
coincide with the target, is beyond it if the line of sight is below or
angle of sight is too small, and short of it if the line of sight is too
high--that is, range and fuze will be wrong. The process of indirect
laying for elevation therefore is, first, the measurement of the angle
of sight, and secondly, the setting of the sights to that angle by means
of a clinometer; this is called clinometer laying. In all cases the
actual elevation of the gun to enable the shell to strike the target is
a purely mechanical adjustment, performed independently; the gun is
moved relatively to the sights, which have been previously set as
described. Frequently the battery commander directs the guns from a
point at some distance, communication being maintained by signallers or
by field telephone. This is the normal procedure when the guns are
firing from cover. Instruments of precision and careful calculations
are, of course, required to fight a battery in this manner, many
allowances having to be made for the differences in height, distance and
angle between the position of the battery commander and that of the
guns.

29. _Ranging_[4] (except on the French system alluded to below) is,
first, finding the range (i.e. elevation required), and secondly,
correcting the standard length of fuze for that range in accordance with
the circumstances of each case. To find the elevation required, it is
necessary to observe the bursts of shells "on graze" with reference to
the target. The battery commander orders two elevations differing by 300
yds., e.g. "2500, 2800," and tells off a "ranging section" of two guns.
These proceed to fire percussion shrapnel at the two different
elevations, in order to obtain bursts "over" (+) and "short" (-). When
it is certain that this "long bracket" is obtained, the "100 yds.
bracket" is found, the elevations in the given case being, perhaps, 2600
and 2700 yds. "Verifying" rounds are then fired, to make certain of the
100 yds. bracket. The old "short bracket" (50 yds.) is not now required
except at standing targets. Circumstances may, of course, shorten the
process; for instance, a hit upon the target itself could be "verified"
at once. The determination of the fuze (by time shrapnel) follows. The
fuze has a standard length for the ascertained range, but the proper
correction of this standard length to suit the atmospheric conditions
has to be made. The commander has therefore already given out a series
of corrector[5] lengths, his object being to secure bursts both in air
and on graze. When he is finally satisfied he opens fire "for effect."

30. An example of the ordinary method of ranging, adapted from _Field
Artillery Training_, 1906, is given below.

  Battery commander gives target, &c., and orders: "Right section
  ranging section; remainder corrector 150 increase 10, 4400-4700," for
  the long bracket.

  No. 1 gun fires, elevation 4400 yds., P.S., round observed -
  No. 2  "    "        "     4700  "      "     "       "    +
                B.C. orders "4500-4600."
  No. 1 gun fires, elevation 4500 yds., P.S., round observed -
  No. 2  "    "        "     4600  "      "     "       "    +

  The 100 yds. bracket appears to be 4500-4600. B.C. orders: "Remainder
  4500 time shrapnel," and gives the ranging section 4500-4600 to
  "verify." Guns 3, 4, 5, 6 set fuzes for 4500 with correctors 150, 160,
  170, 180.

  No. 1 gun fires, elevation 4500 yds., P.S., round observed -
  No. 2  "    "        "     4600  "      "     "       "    +
     B.C. orders: "Remainder 4500, one round gun fire, 3 seconds."
             No. 3 elevation 4500 yds. T.S. corrector 150 air
             No. 4     "      "    "    "       "     160 air
             No. 5     "      "    "    "       "     160 graze
             No. 6     "      "    "    "       "     180   "

  B.C. selects corrector 160 and goes to "section fire."

  The battery now begins to fire "for effect."

             No. 1 elevation 4500 yds. T.S. corrector 160 air
             No. 3     "      "         "      "       "   "

  followed by Nos. 5, 2, 4 and 6.

There is another method of ranging, viz. with time shrapnel only. In
this the principle is that several shells, fired with the same corrector
setting, but at different elevations, will burst in air at different
points along one line. Bursts high in the air cannot be judged, and it
is therefore necessary to bring down the line of bursts to the target,
so that the bursts in air appear directly in front or directly in rear
of it. Rounds are therefore fired (in pairs owing to possible
imperfections in the fuzes) to ascertain the corrector which gives the
best line of observation. This found, the target is bracketed by bursts
low in the air observed + and -, as in the ordinary method with
percussion shrapnel.

The operations of finding the "line of fire" and the proper elevation
may be combined, as the shells in ranging can be made to "bracket" for
direction as well as for elevation. The line can be changed towards a
new target in any kind of direct and indirect laying, in the latter case
by observing the angle made with it by the original line of fire and
giving deflection to the guns accordingly. Further, the fire of several
dispersed batteries may be concentrated, distributed, or "switched" from
one target to another on a wide front, at the will of the commander.

31. _Observation of Fire_, on the accuracy of which depends the success
of ranging, may be done either by the battery commander himself or by a
special "observing" party. In either case the shooting is carefully
observed throughout, and corrections ordered at any time, whether during
the process of ranging or during fire for effect. The difficulties of
observation vary considerably with the ground, &c., for instance, the
light may be so bad that the target can hardly be seen, or again, if
there be a hollow in front of the target, a shell may burst in it so far
below that the smoke appears thin, the round being then judged "over"
instead of "short." On the other hand, a hollow behind the target may
cause a round to be lost altogether. Ranging with time shrapnel has the
merit of avoiding most of these "traps." The "French system of fire
discipline," referred to below, has this method as the usual procedure.

32. _Fire._--Field Artillery ranges are classed in the British service
as: "distant," 6000 to 4500 yds.; "long," 4500 to 3500; "effective,"
3500 to 2000: and "decisive," 2000 and under. The actual methods of
fire employed are matters of detail; it will be sufficient to say that
"section fire," in which the two guns of a section are fired alternately
at a named interval, usually 30 seconds, and "rapid fire," in which two,
three or more rounds as ordered are fired by each gun as quickly as
possible, are the normal methods. Each battery usually engages a portion
of the objective equal in length to its own front, owing to the spread
of the cone of shrapnel bullets (see below). The fire is, of course,
almost always frontal, though enfilade and oblique fire, when
opportunities occur for their employment, are more deadly than ever,
because of the depth of the cone. As for the general conduct of an
artillery action, accurate fire for effect, at a medium rate, is used in
most armies, but in the French and, since 1906, in the British services
a new method has arisen, in consequence of the introduction of the
modern quick-firer and the perfection of the time shrapnel. The French
battery (1900 Q.F. equipment) consists of four guns and twelve wagons.
The gun is shielded, as also are the wagons; the high velocity and flat
trajectory give a maximum depth to the cone of shrapnel bullets. In the
hope of obtaining a rapid and overwhelming fire, the French artillery
ranges only for a long bracket, and once this bracket is found, the
ground within its limits is swept from end to end in a burst of rapid
fire. This is termed a _rafale_ (squall or gust), and technically
signifies "a series of eight rounds per gun, each two rounds being laid
with 100 metres more elevation than the last pair, the whole fired off
as rapidly as possible." The cone of time shrapnel being assumed as 300
yds. (or metres), it is clear that four pairs of rounds, bursting, say,
at 1000, 1100, 1200 and 1300 yds. (adding, for the last, 300 yds. for
its forward effect), sweep the whole ground between 1000 and 1600 yds.
from the guns. The maximum depth would, of course, be obtained with four
elevations differing by the depth of the cone; in such a case the space
from 1000 to 2200 yds. would be covered, though much less effectively,
since the same number of bullets are distributed over a larger area. On
the other hand, the _rafale_, at a minimum, covers 300 yds., all the
guns in this case being laid at the same elevation throughout. Here the
maximum number of bullets is obtained for every square yard attacked.
Between these extremes, a skilful artillery officer can vary the
_rafale_ to the needs of each several case almost indefinitely.
"Sweeping" fire is a series of three rounds per gun, one in the original
line, one to the right and one to the left of it; this is significantly
called "mowing" (_tir fauchant_). A further refinement in both services
is the combined "search and sweep." Forty-eight rounds, constituting in
the French army a series of this last kind, can, it is said, be fired in
1 minute and 15 seconds, without setting fuzes beforehand, to cover an
area of 600 × 200 metres. The result of such a series, worked out
mathematically, is that 19% of all men and 75% of all horses, in the
area and not under cover, should be hit by separate bullets (Bethell,
_Modern Guns and Gunnery_, 1907). Even allowing a liberal deduction for
imperfect distribution of bullets, we may feel certain that nothing but
shielded guns could live long in the fire-swept zone. This is, of
course, a rate of fire which could not be kept up for any length of time
by the same battery. A French battery, firing at the maximum rate, would
expend every available round in 13 minutes.

33. _Projectiles Employed._--"Time shrapnel," say the German Field
Artillery regulations, "is the projectile _par excellence_ ... against
all animate targets which are not under cover." It achieves its purpose,
as has been said, by sending a shower of bullets over an area of ground
in such quantity that this is swept from end to end. These bullets are
propelled, in a cone, forward from the point of burst of the shell, and
the effective depth of this cone at medium ranges with a fairly high
velocity gun may be taken at 300 yds. Further, the corrector enables the
artillery commander to burst his shells at any desired point; for
example, a long fuze may be given, to burst them close up when firing
upon a deep target (such as troops in several lines, one behind the
other), and thereby to obtain the maximum searching effect, or to obtain
direct hits on shielded guns, while a short corrector, bursting the
shell well in front of the enemy, allows the maximum lateral spread of
the bullets, and therefore sweeps the greatest front. The number of
bullets in the shell is such that troops in the open under effective
shrapnel fire must suffer very heavily, and may be almost annihilated.
If the enemy is close behind good cover, the bullets, indeed, pass
harmlessly overhead. This, however, leads to a very important fact, viz.
that artillery can keep down the fire of hostile infantry, "blind" the
enemy, in Langlois' phrase, by _pinning it down_ to cover. Under cover
the men are safe, but if they raise their heads to take careful aim,
they will almost certainly be hit. Their fire under such conditions is
therefore unaimed and wild at the best, and may be wholly ineffective.
_Common_ shell and _high-explosive_ shell (see AMMUNITION) belong to
another class of projectile. The former is now not often used, but a
certain proportion of H.E. shell is carried by the field artillery in
many armies (see table in ORDNANCE: _Field Equipments_). This has a very
violent local effect within a radius of 20 to 25 yds. of the point of
burst (see AMMUNITION, fig. 10). It therefore covers far less ground
than shrapnel, and is naturally used either (a) against troops under
substantial cover or (b) to wreck cover and buildings. In the former
case the shell is supposed to send a rain of splinters vertically
downwards. This it will do, provided the fuze is minutely accurate, and
a burst is thus obtained exactly over the heads of the enemy, but this
is now generally held to be unlikely, and in so far as effect against
_personnel_ is concerned the H.E. shell is not thought to be of much
value. Indeed, in the British and several other services, no H.E. shells
at all are carried by field batteries, reliance being placed upon
percussion shrapnel in attacking localities, buildings, &c., and for
ranging. Experiments have been made towards producing a "H.E. shrapnel,"
which combines the characteristics of both types (see, for a
description, AMMUNITION). For the projectiles used in attacking shielded
guns, see section on "field howitzers" below. _Case shot_ is now rarely
employed. In the war of 1870-71 Prince Kraft von Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen,
who commanded the Prussian Guard artillery, reported the expenditure of
only one round of case, and even that was merely "broken in transport."
The close-quarters projectile of to-day is more usually shrapnel with
the fuze set at zero. Langlois, however, calls case shot "the true
projectile for critical moments, which nothing can replace."

34. _Tactics of Field Artillery._--On the march, the position and
movement of the guns are regulated by the necessity of coming quickly
into action; the usual place for the arm is at or near the heads of the
combatant columns, i.e. as far forward as is consistent with safety.
Safety is further provided for by an "escort," or, if such be not
detailed, by the nearest infantry or cavalry. In attack, the role of the
field artillery is usually (1) to assist if necessary the advanced guard
in the preliminary fighting--for this purpose a battery is usually
assigned to that corps of troops, other batteries also being sent up to
the front as required, (2) to prepare, and (3) to support or cover the
infantry attack. "Preparation" consists chiefly in engaging and subduing
the hostile artillery. This is often spoken of as the "artillery duel,"
and is not a meaningless bombardment, but an essential preliminary to
the advance. Massed guns with modern shrapnel would, if allowed to play
freely upon the attack, infallibly stop, and probably annihilate, the
troops making it. The task of the guns, then, is to destroy the opposing
guns and artillerymen, a task which will engage almost all the resources
of the assailant's artillery in the struggle for artillery superiority.
Shielded guns, enhanced rate of fire, perfection in indirect laying
apparatus, and many other factors, have modified the lessons of 1870,
and complicated the work of achieving victory in the artillery duel so
far that the simple "hard pounding" of former days has given way to a
variety of expedients for inflicting the desired loss and damage, as to
which opinions differ in and within every army. One point is, however,
clear and meets with universal acceptance. "The whole object of the duel
is to enable the artillery subsequently to devote all available
resources to its principal task, which is the material and moral support
of the infantry during each succeeding stage of the fight" (French
regulations). One side must be victorious in the end, and when, and not
until, the hostile artillery is beaten out of action, the victor has
acquired the power of pressing home the attack. The British regulations
(1906), indeed, deal with the steps to be taken when, though the
artillery of the attack is beaten, the infantry advance is continued,
but only so as to order the guns to "reopen at all costs," in other
words, as a forlorn hope. The second part of the preparation, the
gradual disintegration of the opposing line of infantry, has practically
disappeared from the drill books. The next task of the guns, and that in
which modern artillery asserts its power to the utmost, is the _support_
of the infantry attack. The artillery and infantry co-operate, "the
former by firing rapidly when they see their own infantry ... press
forward, and the latter by making full use of the periods of intense
artillery fire to gain ground" (British _F.A. Training_, 1906). Thus
aided, the infantry closes in to decisive ranges, and as it gains ground
to the front, every gun "must be at once turned upon the points selected
... the most effective support afforded to the attacking infantry by the
concentrated fire of guns and field howitzers. The former tie the
defenders to their entrenchments (for retreat is practically impossible
over ground swept by shrapnel bullets), distract their attention and
tend to make them keep their heads down, while the shell from the field
howitzers searches out the interior of the trenches, the reverse slopes
of the position, and checks the movement of reinforcements towards the
threatened point." In these words the British Field Artillery drill-book
of 1902 summarizes the act of "covering" the infantry advance.
Unofficial publications are still more emphatic. The advance of the
infantry to decisive range would often be covered by a mass of one
hundred or more field guns, firing shrapnel at the rate of ten rounds
per gun per minute at the critical moment. Against such a storm of fire
the defending infantry, even supposing that its own guns had refitted
and were again in action, would be powerless. It is in recognition of
the appalling power of field artillery (which has increased in a ratio
out of all proportion to the improvements of modern rifles) that the
French system has been elaborated to the perfection which it has now
attained.

With modern guns and modern tactics artillery almost invariably fires
over the heads of its own infantry. The German regulations indeed say
that it should be avoided as far as possible, but, as a matter of fact,
if the numerous guns of a modern army (at Königgrätz there were 1550
guns on the field, at Gravelotte 1252, at Mukden 3000) were to be given
a clear front, there would be no room for deploying the infantry.
Consequently the French regulations, in which the power of the artillery
is given the greatest possible scope, say that "it almost always fires
over the heads of its own infantry." With field guns and on level ground
it is considered dangerous that infantry in front of the guns should be
less than 600 yds. distant--not for fear of the shells striking the
infantry, but because the fragments resulting from a "premature" burst
are dangerous up to that distance. The question of distance is more
important in connexion with the "covering" of the assault. Up to a
point, the artillery enables the attacking infantry to advance with a
minimum of loss and exhaustion, and thus to close with the enemy at
least on equal terms, if not with a serious advantage, for the fire of
the guns may shake, perhaps almost destroy the enemy's power of
resistance. But when the infantry approaches the enemy the guns can no
longer fire upon the latter's front line without risk of injuring their
friends. All that they can do, when the opposing infantries can see the
whites of each other's eyes, is to lengthen the fuze, raise the
trajectory and sweep the ground where the enemy's supports are posted.
Under these circumstances it is practically agreed that the risk should
be taken without hesitation at so critical a moment as that of a
decisive infantry assault which must be pushed home at whatever cost.
"It will be better for the infantry to chance a few friendly shells than
to be received at short range with a fresh outburst of hostile rifle
fire" (Rouquerol, _Tactical Employment of Quick-firing Field
Artillery_). Thus, the distance at which direct support ceases, formerly
600 yds., has been diminished to 100, and even to 50 yds. Howitzers can,
of course, maintain their fire almost up to the very last stage, and, in
general, high-explosive shell, owing to its purely local effect, may be
employed for some time after it has become unsafe to use shrapnel.

35. Field artillery in _defence_, which would presumably be inferior to
that of the attack, must, of course, act according to circumstances. We
are here concerned not with the absolute strength or weakness of the
passive defensive, which is a matter of tactics (q.v.), but with the
tactical procedure of artillery, which, relatively to other methods, is
held to offer the best chance of success, so far as success is
attainable. On the defensive in a prepared position, which in European
warfare at any rate will be an unusually favourable case for the
defender--the guns have two functions, that of engaging and holding the
hostile artillery, and that of meeting the infantry assault. The dilemma
is this, that on the one hand a position in rear of the line of battle,
with modern improvements in communicating and indirect laying apparatus,
is well suited for engaging the hostile guns, but not for meeting the
assault; and on the other, guns on the forward slope of the defender's
ridge or hill can fire direct, but are quickly located and overwhelmed,
for they can hardly remain silent while their own infantry bears the
fire of the assailant's shrapnel. Thus the defender's guns would, as a
rule, have to be divided. One portion would seek to fight from rearward
concealed positions, and use every device to delay the victory of the
enemy's guns and the development of the battle until it is too late in
the day for a serious infantry attack. Further, the enemy's mistakes and
the "fortune of war" may give opportunities of inflicting severe losses;
such opportunities have always occurred and will do so again. In the
possible (though very far from probable) case of the defender not merely
baffling, but crushing his opponent in the artillery duel, he may, if he
so desires, himself assume the role of assailant, and at any rate he
places a veto on the enemy's attack.

The portion told off to meet the infantry assault would be entrenched on
the forward slope and would take no part in the artillery duel. Very
exceptionally, this advanced artillery might fire upon favourable
targets, but its paramount duty is to remain intact for the decisive
moment. Here again the defender is confronted with grave difficulties.
It is true that his advanced batteries may be of the greatest possible
assistance at the crisis of the infantry assault, yet even so the
covering fire of the hostile guns, as soon as the hostile infantry had
found them their target, may be absolutely overwhelming; moreover, once
the fight has begun, the guns cannot be withdrawn, nor can their
positions easily be modified to meet unexpected developments. The
proportion of the whole artillery force which should be committed to the
forward position is disputed. Colonel Bethell (_Journal Royal
Artillery_, vol. xxxiii. p. 67) holds that all the mountain guns, and
two-thirds of the field guns, should be in the forward, all the
howitzers and heavy guns and one-third of the field guns in the retired
position. But in view of the facts that if once the advanced guns are
submerged in the tide of the enemy's assault, they will be
irrecoverable, and that a modern Q.F. gun, with plenty of ammunition at
hand, may use "rapid fire" freely, artillery opinion, as a whole, is in
favour of having fewer guns and an abnormal ammunition supply in the
forward entrenchments, and the bulk of the artillery (with the
ammunition columns at hand) in rear. But the purely passive defensive is
usually but a preliminary to an active counter-stroke. This
counter-attack would naturally be supported to the utmost by the
offensive tactics of the artillery, which might thus at the end of a
battle achieve far greater results than it could have done at the
beginning of the day. In _pursuit_, it is universally agreed that the
action of the artillery may be bold to the verge of rashness. The
employment of field artillery in _advanced_ and _rear guard actions_
varies almost indefinitely according to circumstances; with _outposts_,
guns would only be employed exceptionally.

36. _Marches._--The importance of having the artillery well up at the
front of a marching column is perhaps best expressed in the phrase of
Prince Kraft von Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen, "save hours and not minutes."
The Germans in 1870 so far acted up to the principle that Prince
Hohenlohe, when asked, at the beginning of the battle of Sedan, for a
couple of guns, was able to reply, "You shall have ninety" (see, for
details of the march of the Guard artillery, his _Letters on Artillery_,
6th letter). The German regulations for field service say, very plainly,
"the horses have not done their work until they have got the guns into
action, even at the cost of utter exhaustion." A notable march was made
by the 62nd battery, R.F.A., in the South African War. On the day of the
battle of Modder River, the battery marched 32 m. (mostly through deep
sand) arriving in time to take part in the action. Such forced marches,
if rare, are nowadays expected to be within the power of field artillery
to accomplish. Horse artillery is capable of more than this, and as to
pace, manoeuvring at the cavalry rate. Heavy guns are the least mobile,
and would rarely be able to keep pace with infantry in a forced march.
Field artillery walks 4, trots 9, and gallops at the rate of 15 m. an
hour. A fair marching pace (trot and walk) is 4 m. an hour for field, 5
for horse batteries. A march of 14 m. would, according to the German
regulations, be performed by

  a field battery in 5 hours,
  a horse battery in 4 hours,

under favourable circumstances (Bronsart von Schellendorf).

37. _Power and Mobility._--It will have been made clear that every gun
represents a compromise between these two requirements, and that each
type of artillery has been evolved in accordance with the relative
requirements of these conditions in respect of the work to be performed.
The classification which has been followed in this article represents
the practically unanimous decision of every important military state.
Still, there has always been controversy between the individual
adherents of each side, and the Boer War experiences raised the question
as to whether field artillery, as the term is usually understood, should
not be abolished, with a view to having only heavy guns and horse
artillery with a field army.

38. _Concentration and Dispersion._--The use of their artillery made by
the Boers in the South African War led to the revival of the idea of
"dispersing" guns instead of "concentrating" them. It would be more
accurate to say that military thinkers had, after the introduction of
the quick-firing gun, challenged every received principle, and amongst
others the employment of artillery in masses, which, as a result of the
war of 1870, "had become almost an article of faith." The idea was to
make use of the increased power of the guns to gain equally great
results with the employment of less material than formerly. Thus the
dispersion of guns is bound up with the passive defensive. The first
editions of the British _Field Artillery Training_ and _Combined
Training_, strongly influenced as they were by South African experience,
did not legislate, even in dealing with defence, for "dispersion" in the
Boer manner, but only for adaptability (see _Field Artillery Training_,
1902, p. 15). In the Boer War, whilst the Boers nearly always scattered
their guns, almost the only occasion upon which their artillery played a
decisive part was at Spion Kop, where its fire was concentrated upon the
point of assault. At Pieter's Hill, the fire of seventy guns covered the
British infantry assault in the Napoleonic manner. On the whole it may
be accepted as a general truth that guns are safe, and may be locally
effective, when dispersed, but that they cannot produce decisive effect
except when used in masses. It must, however, be clearly understood that
a "mass" in this sense means a large number of guns, under one command,
and susceptible of being handled as a unit, so far as the direction and
effectiveness of their fire is concerned. _This being secured_, and on
that condition only, it does not matter whether the actual gun positions
are scattered over a few square miles, or are closed in one long line
and using direct fire--they are still a mass, and capable of acting
effectively as such. While there are undoubtedly grave dangers in using
the indirect method too freely, technical improvements in laying,
telephones, &c., have had much to do with the possibility, at any rate
under favourable circumstances, of a concentration which may be
described as one of shells rather than of guns, and the reader is
reminded in this connexion that the work formerly done by the gun is now
performed by the shell.

39. _Horse Artillery_ is to be regarded as field artillery of great
mobility and manoeuvring power. Its value may be said, in general terms,
to lie in augmenting the weak fire-power of the mounted troops, and in
facilitating their work as much as possible. Thus, when cavalry meets
serious opposition in reconnoitring, the guns may be able to break down
the enemy's resistance without calling for assistance from the main body
of the cavalry, and, in the action of cavalry _versus_ cavalry, the
"paramount duty of the horse artillery is to shatter the enemy's
cavalry" (_Field Artillery Training_, 1906), i.e. to "prepare" the
success of the cavalry charge by breaking up as far as possible the
enemy's power of meeting it. In the cavalry battle, covering fire is
practically impossible, owing both to the short distances separating the
combatants and to the rapidity of their movements, but steps are taken
"to enable all the guns to bear on the enemy's cavalry at the points of
collision." The ideal position for the horse artillery is out to a
flank, the cavalry manoeuvring so as to draw the enemy's cavalry under
enfilade fire, and at the same time to force them to mask the fire of
their own horse artillery. Another and a most important function of the
horse batteries is to reinforce, with the greatest possible speed, any
point in the general line of battle which is in need of artillery
support. For this reason the corps artillery generally includes horse
batteries.

40. _Field Howitzers_ are somewhat less mobile than field guns; they
have, however, far greater shell power. The special features of the
weapon are, of course, the product of the special requirements which
have called it into existence. These are, briefly (a) the necessity of
being able to "search" the interior of earthworks, a task which, as has
been said, is beyond the power of high-velocity field guns, and (b)
demolition work, which is equally beyond the power of even a H.E. shell
of field-gun calibre. The first of these conditions implies a steep
"angle of descent," which again implies a high angle of elevation. The
second requires great shell power but does not call for high velocity.
The howitzer, therefore, is a short gun, firing a heavy shell at high
angles of elevation. Howitzers almost always are laid by the indirect
method of fire from under cover, since it is clear that, with high
angles of elevation, the gun may be brought close up to the covering
mass, and still fire over it. Ranging must be done very accurately and
yet economically, as but few of their heavy shells can be carried in the
wagons and limbers, and the shells descending upon an enemy almost
vertically lose the long sweeping effect of the field shrapnel which
neutralizes minor errors of ranging. The projectiles employed are high
explosive and shrapnel, the latter for use against _personnel_ under
cover, the former for demolition of field works, casemates or buildings.
It is very generally held that howitzer time shrapnel is the best form
of projectile for the attack of shielded guns. Here it may be said that
no completely satisfactory method of dealing with these has yet been
discovered. The best procedure with field guns is said to be lengthening
the fuze to obtain a high percentage of bursts on graze. A shell
striking the face of the shield will penetrate it, and should kill some
at least of the gun detachment behind. The high-explosive shrapnel
alluded to above is designed primarily for the attack of shielded guns.

41. _Heavy Field Artillery_, alternatively called _Artillery of
Position_, as has been said, includes all guns of 4-in. calibre and
upwards, mounted on travelling carriages. In South Africa, where firm
soil was usually to be found, 6-in. guns were employed as heavy field
guns, but in Europe even the 5-in. (British Service) is liable to sink
into the ground. In Great Britain, guns only are used by this branch;
abroad, the "heavy artillery of the field army," the "light siege
train," &c., as it is variously called, is as a rule composed of
howitzers of a heavier calibre than the field howitzer, the 15-cm.
(6-in.) howitzer being most commonly met with. This artillery has,
however, a different tactical rôle from the heavy field artillery of the
British service; and it is always with a view to the attack of permanent
or semi-permanent fortifications that the _matériel_ is organized. In
Great Britain, heavy batteries armed with the 5-in. gun are considered
as "an auxiliary to the horse and field artillery" (_Heavy Artillery
Training_). Ranging is conducted with greater deliberation than ranging
with the lighter guns, though upon the same general lines. Parts of the
process may, however, be omitted in certain circumstances. Heavy guns
use high-explosive (lyddite) shells and time shrapnel, the former for
ranging and for demolishing cover, the latter against _personnel_.
Laying is usually indirect. The tactical principles upon which heavy
artillery does its work are based, in the main, on the long range (up to
10,000 yds.) and great shell-power of the guns. This power enables the
artillery to reach with effect targets which are beyond the range of
lighter ordnance, and it is, therefore, considered possible to disperse
the guns in batteries, and even in sections of two guns, along the front
of the army, without forfeiting the power of concentrating their fire on
any point--a power which otherwise they would not possess owing to their
want of mobility. At the same time it is not forbidden to bring them
into line with the rest of the artillery, in order to achieve a decisive
result. In the _attack_, beside the general task of supplementing the
effect of other natures of ordnance, heavy artillery may demolish cover,
buildings, &c., held by the enemy, and during the infantry assault they
may do excellent service in sweeping a great depth of ground, their
smaller angle of descent, and the greater remaining velocity and heavier
driving charge of their shrapnel, as compared with field guns, enabling
them to do this effectively. In the _defence_, long-range fire has great
value, especially in sweeping approaches which the enemy must use. In
_pursuit_, the heavy artillery may be able to shell the main body of the
enemy during its retreat, even if it has left a rearguard. In _retreat_,
the want of mobility of these guns militates against their employment in
exposed positions, such as rearguards usually have to take up.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.[6]--Amongst general historical works may be mentioned
  Napoleon III. and Col. Favé, _Études sur le passé et l'avenir de
  l'artillerie_ (Paris. 1846-1871); C. von Decker, _Geschichte des
  Geschützwesens_ (Berlin, 1822); H.W.L. Hime, _Stray Military Papers_
  (London, 1901); _Die Beziehung Friedrichs des Grossen zu seiner
  Artillerie_ (Berlin, 1865); H. von Müller, _Die Entwickelung der
  Feldartillerie, 1815-1892_ (Berlin, 1893-1894); J. Campana,
  _L'Artillerie de campagne, 1792-1901_ (Paris, 1901); v. Reitzenstein,
  _Das Geschützwesen, &c. in Hannover und Braunschweig 1365 bis zur
  Gegenwart_ (Leipzig, 1900); Kretschmar, _Gesch. d. sächsischen
  Feldart. 1620-1878_ (1879); Schöning, _Gesch. des brandenbg.-preuss.
  Art._ (1844-1845); Schneller, _Litteratur d. Artillerie_ (1768); v.
  Tempelhof, _Gesch. d. Artillerie_ (1797); Duncan, _Hist. of the Royal
  Artillery_. A complete bibliography and criticism of the artillery
  works of the 14th, 15th and 16th centuries will be found in Max Jähns,
  _Geschichte der Kriegswissenschaften_, pp. 221-236, 382-424, 621, 658
  and 747-752. For the early 17th century, Diego Ufano, _Tratado de la
  Artilleria_ (1613) is a standard treatise of the time, but the mystery
  preserved by artillerists in regard to their arm is responsible for an
  astonishing dearth of artillery literature even in the time of the
  Thirty Years' War. In 1650 appeared Casimir Simienowicz' _Ars magnae
  artilleriae_, an English translation of which was published in London
  in 1729, and in 1683 Michael Mieth published _Artilleriae Recentior
  Praxis_. The first edition of Surirey de S. Remy, _Mémoires
  d'Artillerie_, appeared in Paris in 1697. With the reorganization of
  the arm in the early 18th century came many manuals and other works
  (see Jähns, _op. cit._ pp. 1607-1621 and 1692-1698), amongst which may
  be mentioned the marquis de Quincy's _Art de la guerre_ (1726). From
  1740 onwards numerous manuals appeared, mostly official
  _règlements_--see French General Staff, _L'Artillerie française au
  XVIII^e siècle_ (1908); and the tactical handling of the arm is
  treated in general works, such as Guibert's, on war. See also de
  Morla, _Tratado de la Artilleria_ (1784), translated into German by
  Hoyer (_Lehrbuch der Art.-Wissenschaft_, Leipzig, 1821-1826); _Du
  Service de l'artillerie à la guerre_ (Paris, 1780, German translation,
  Dresden, 1782, and English, by Capt. Thomson, R.A., London, 1789),
  Bardet de Villeneuve's _Traité de l'artillerie_ (Hague, 1741), and
  Hennébert, _Gribeauval, Lieut.-Général des armées du Roy_ (Paris,
  1896). Important works of the period 1800-1850 are Scharnhorst,
  _Handbuch der Artillerie_ (Hanover, 1804-1806, French translation by
  Fourcy, _Traité sur l'artillerie_, Paris, 1840-1841); Rouvroy,
  _Vorlesungen über die Artillerie_ (Dresden, 1821-1825); Timmerhans,
  _Essai d'un traité d'artillerie_ (Brussels, 1839-1846); C. v. Decker,
  _Die Artillerie für alle Waffen_ (1826); Griffiths, _The Artillerist's
  Manual_ (Woolwich, 1840); Piobert, _Traité d'artillerie_ (Paris,
  1845-1847); Taubert (translated by Maxwell), _Use of Field Artillery
  on Service_ (London, 1856); Capt. Simmonds, R.A., _Application of
  Artillery in the Field_ (London, 1819); Gassendi, _Aide-mémoire à
  l'usage des officiers d'artillerie_ (Paris, 1819). See also Girod de
  l'Ain, _Grands artilleurs, Drouot, Sénarmont, Éblé_ (Paris, 1894).
  Among the numerous works on modern field artillery may be mentioned
  Prince Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen, _Briefe über Artillerie_ (Berlin, 1887,
  2nd ed., English translation by Col. Walford, _Letters on Artillery_,
  Woolwich, 1887); Hoffbauer, _Taktik der Feldartillerie, 1866 und
  1870-1871_ (Berlin, 1876), and _Applikatorische Studie über Verwendung
  der Artillerie_ (Berlin, 1884); Erb, _L'Artillerie dans les batailles
  de Metz_ (Paris, 1906); Leurs, _L'Art. de campagne prussienne
  1864-1870_ (Brussels, 1874); v. Schell, _Studie über Taktik der
  Feldartillerie_ (quoted above); Hennébert, _Artillerie moderne_
  (Paris, 1889); and for quick-firing artillery, Langlois, _Artillerie
  de campagne en liaison avec les autres armes_ (Paris, 1892 and 1907);
  Wille, _Feldgeschütz der Zukunft_ (Berlin, 1891); _Waffenlehre_ (2nd
  ed., 1901); and _Zur Feldgeschützfrage_ (Berlin, 1896); Rohne, _Die
  Taktik der Feldartillerie_ (Berlin, 1900), _Studie über d.
  Schnellfeuergeschütze in Rohrrücklauflafette_ (Berlin, 1901), _Die
  französische Feldartillerie_ (Berlin, 1902); _Entwicklung des
  Massengebrauchs der Feldartillerie_ (Berlin, 1900); and articles in
  _Jahrbücher f. d. Deutsche Armee und Marine_ (October 1901 and January
  1905); Hoffbauer, _Die Frage des Schnellfeuerfeldgeschützes_ (Berlin,
  1902), and _Verwendung der Feldhaubitzen_ (Berlin, 1901); Wangemann,
  _Für die leichte Feldhaubitze_ (Berlin, 1904); von Reichenau, _Studie
  über ... Ausbildung der Feldart_. (Berlin, 1896), _Einfluss der
  Schilde auf die Entwicklung des F.-A. Materials_, and _Neue Studien
  über die Entwicklung der Feldart._ (Berlin, 1902 and 1903); Smekal,
  _Führung und Verwendung der Divisions-Artillerie_ (Vienna, 1901);
  Korzen and Kühn, _Waffenlehre_ (Vienna, 1906); G. Rouquerol, _Emploi
  de l'artillerie de campagne à tir rapide_ (Paris, 1901), and
  _Organisation de l'artillerie de campagne_ (Paris, 1903);
  Girardon-Lagabbe, _Organisation du matériel de l'artillerie de
  campagne_ (Paris, 1903); and in English, Capt. P. de B. Radcliffe's
  translation of Rouquerol's work (_The Tactical Employment of
  Quick-firing Field Artillery_, London, 1903), and especially Lt.-Col.
  H.A. Bethell, _Modern Guns and Gunnery_ (Woolwich, 1907). See also the
  current drill manuals of the British, French and German artillery.
       (C. F. A.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Napoleon's maxim, quoted above, reappears in spirit in the
    British F.A. Training of 1906 (p. 225).

  [2] The old smooth-bore mortar for high-angle fire has of course
    disappeared, but the name "mortar" is still applied in some countries
    to short rifled howitzers.

  [3] Though not of course against the direct impact of shrapnel or
    H.E. shells.

  [4] Finding the line is also an integral part of ranging. When an
    aiming point is used, the angle at which the guns must be laid with
    reference to it is calculated and given out by the battery commander.
    The modern goniometric sight permits of a wide angle (in England 180°
    right or left) being given. "Deflection" is a small angular
    correction applied to individual guns.

  [5] The "corrector" is an adjustment on the sights of the gun used to
    determine the correct fuze. In the British Q.F. equipment, a
    graduated dial or drum shows the elevation of the gun above the line
    of sight. The fuze lengths are marked on a movable scale opposite the
    range graduations to which they apply, and the "corrector" moves this
    fuze scale so as to bring different fuze lengths opposite the range
    graduation. For example, a certain corrector setting gives 11½ on the
    fuze scale opposite 4000 yds. on the range scale, and if the shells
    set to 11½ burst too high, a new corrector setting is taken, the fuze
    length 12 is now opposite to the 4000 range graduation, and this
    length gives bursts closer up and lower. In the German service a
    corrector (_Aufsatzschieber_) alters the real elevation given to the
    gun, so that while throughout the battery all guns have the same
    (nominal or ordered) elevation shown on the sights, the real
    elevations of individual guns vary according to the different
    corrector settings. Thus bursts at different heights and distances
    from the target are obtained by shifting the trajectory of the shell.
    The fuze, being set for the nominal elevation common to all the guns,
    burns for the same time in each case, and thus the burst will be
    lower and closer to the target with a less (real) elevation, and
    higher and farther from it with a greater.

  [6] Most of the works named deal with technical questions of
    equipment, ammunition, ballistics, &c.