AUSTRIA-HUNGARY, or the AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN MONARCHY (Ger.
_Österreichisch-ungarische Monarchie_ or _Österreichisch-ungarisches
Reich_), the official name of a country situated in central Europe, bounded
E. by Russia and Rumania, S. by Rumania, Servia, Turkey and Montenegro, W.
by the Adriatic Sea, Italy, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, and the German
Empire, and N. by the German Empire and Russia. It occupies about the
sixteenth part of the total area of Europe, with an area (1905) of 239,977
sq. m. The monarchy consists of two independent states: the kingdoms and
lands represented in the council of the empire (_Reichsrat_), unofficially
called Austria (_q.v._) or Cisleithania; and the "lands of St Stephen's
Crown," unofficially called Hungary (_q.v._) or Transleithania. It received
its actual name by the diploma of the emperor Francis Joseph I. of the 14th
of November 1868, replacing the name of the Austrian Empire under which the
dominions under his sceptre were formerly known. The Austro-Hungarian
monarchy is very often called unofficially the Dual Monarchy. It had in
1901 a population of 45,405,267 inhabitants, comprising therefore within
its borders, about one-eighth of the total population of Europe. By the
Berlin Treaty of 1878 the principalities of Bosnia and Herzegovina with an
area of 19,702 sq. m., and a population (1895) of 1,591,036 inhabitants,
owning Turkey as suzerain, were placed under the administration of
Austria-Hungary, and their annexation in 1908 was recognized by the Powers
in 1909, so that they became part of the dominions of the monarchy.

_Government_.--The present constitution of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy
(see AUSTRIA) is based on the Pragmatic Sanction of the emperor Charles
VI., first promulgated on the 19th of April 1713, whereby the succession to
the throne is settled in the dynasty of Habsburg-Lorraine, descending by
right of primogeniture and lineal succession to male heirs, and, in case of
their extinction, to the female line, and whereby the indissolubility and
indivisibility of the monarchy are determined; is based, further, on the
diploma of the emperor Francis Joseph I. of the 20th of October 1860,
whereby the constitutional form of government is introduced; and, lastly,
on the so-called _Ausgleich_ or "Compromise," concluded on the 8th of
February 1867, whereby the relations between Austria and Hungary were
regulated.

The two separate states--Austria and Hungary--are completely independent of
each other, and each has its own parliament and its own government. The
unity of the monarchy is expressed in the common head of the state, who
bears the title Emperor of Austria and Apostolic King of Hungary, and in
the common administration of a series of affairs, which affect both halves
of the Dual Monarchy. These are: (1) foreign affairs, including diplomatic
and consular representation abroad; (2) the army, including the navy, but
excluding the annual voting of recruits, and the special army of each
state; (3) finance in so far as it concerns joint expenditure.

For the administration of these common affairs there are three joint
ministries: the ministry of foreign affairs and of the imperial and royal
house, the ministry of war, and the ministry of finance. It must be noted
that the authority of the joint ministers is restricted to common affairs,
and that they are not allowed to direct or exercise any influence on
affairs of government affecting separately one of the halves of the
monarchy. [v.03 p.0003] The minister of foreign affairs conducts the
international relations of the Dual Monarchy, and can conclude
international treaties. But commercial treaties, and such state treaties as
impose burdens on the state, or parts of the state, or involve a change of
territory, require the parliamentary assent of both states. The minister of
war is the head for the administration of all military affairs, except
those of the Austrian _Landwehr_ and of the Hungarian _Honveds_, which are
committed to the ministries for national defence of the two respective
states. But the supreme command of the army is vested in the monarch, who
has the power to take all measures regarding the whole army. It follows,
therefore, that the total armed power of the Dual Monarchy forms a whole
under the supreme command of the sovereign. The minister of finance has
charge of the finances of common affairs, prepares the joint budget, and
administers the joint state debt. (Till 1909 the provinces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina were also administered by the joint minister of finance,
excepting matters exclusively dependent on the minister of war.) For the
control of the common finances, there is appointed a joint supreme court of
accounts, which audits the accounts of the joint ministries.

_Budget_.--Side by side with the budget of each state of the Dual Monarchy,
there is a common budget, which comprises the expenditure necessary for the
common affairs, namely for the conduct of foreign affairs, for the army,
and for the ministry of finance. The revenues of the joint budget consist
of the revenues of the joint ministries, the net proceeds of the customs,
and the quota, or the proportional contributions of the two states. This
quota is fixed for a period of years, and generally coincides with the
duration of the customs and commercial treaty. Until 1897 Austria
contributed 70%, and Hungary 30% of the joint expenditure, remaining
after-deduction of the common revenue. It was then decided that from 1897
to July 1907 the quota should be 66-46/49 for Austria, and 33-2/49 for
Hungary. In 1907 Hungary's contribution was raised to 36.4%. Of the total
charges 2% is first of all debited to Hungary on account of the
incorporation with this state of the former military frontier.

The Budget estimates for the common administration were as follows in
1905:--

      _Revenue_--
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs                        £21,167
  Ministry of War                                    305,907
  Ministry of Finance                                  4,870
  Board of Control                                        18
  The Customs                                      4,780,000
  Proportional contributions                      15,650,448
                                                 -----------
                                       Total     £20,762,410
                                                 ===========

      _Expenditure_--
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs                       £485,480
  Ministry of War:--
    Army                                          12,679,160
    Navy                                           2,306,100
  Ministry of Finance                                177,000
  Board of Control                                    13,250
  Extraordinary Military Expenditure               4,785,500
  Extraordinary Military Expenditure in Bosnia       315,920
                                                 -----------
                                       Total     £20,762,410
                                                 ===========

The following table gives in thousands sterling the joint budget for the
years 1875-1905:--

                                      _Expenditure._

                             1875.     1885.    1895.    1900.     1905.
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs 396       368.7    333      433.4     493.8
  Ministry of War            9005.4  10,085   12,539   13,887.5  18,087.7
     (Army and Navy)
  Ministry of Finance         154.2     167.2    170.4    175       177.1
  Supreme Court of Accounts    10.5      10.6     10.7     12.5      13.3
                     Total   9566.1  10,631.5 13,053.1 14,508.4  20,430.3

                                        _Revenue._

  For the above Departments    432      258.2    260.7    260.3     331.9
  Customs                      997.4    402.2   4476     5202.3    4799.7
  Proportional Contributions  8136.7   9971.1   8316.4   9045.8  15,650.4
                     Total    9566.1 10,631.5 13,053.1 14,508.4  20,430.3

_Debt._--Besides the debts of each state of the Dual Monarchy, there is a
general debt, which is borne jointly by Austria and Hungary. The following
table gives in millions sterling the amount of the general debt for the
years 1875-1905:--

   1875.     1885.     1895.     1900.     1905.
  232.41    231.02    229.67    226.81    224.31

_Delegations_.--The constitutional right of voting money applicable to the
common affairs and of its political control is exercised by the
Delegations, which consist each of sixty members, chosen for one year,
one-third of them by the Austrian Herrenhaus (Upper House) and the
Hungarian Table of Magnates (Upper House), and two-thirds of them by the
Austrian and the Hungarian Houses of Representatives. The delegations are
annually summoned by the monarch alternately to Vienna and to Budapest.
Each delegation has its separate sittings, both alike public. Their
decisions are reciprocally communicated in writing, and, in case of
non-agreement, their deliberations are renewed. Should three such
interchanges be made without agreement, a common plenary sitting is held of
an equal number of both delegations; and these collectively, without
discussion, decide the question by common vote. The common decisions of
both houses require for their validity the sanction of the monarch. Each
delegation has the right to formulate resolutions independently, and to
call to account and arraign the common ministers. In the exercise of their
office the members of both delegations are irresponsible, enjoying
constitutional immunity.

_Army_.--The military system of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy is similar in
both states, and rests since 1868 upon the principle of the universal and
personal obligation of the citizen to bear arms. Its military force is
composed of the common army (_K. und K._); the special armies, namely the
Austrian (_K.K._) _Landwehr_, and the Hungarian _Honveds_, which are
separate national institutions, and the _Landsturm_ or levy-in-mass. As
stated above, the common army stands under the administration of the joint
minister of war, while the special armies are under the administration of
the respective ministries of national defence. The yearly contingent of
recruits for the army is fixed by the military bills voted by the Austrian
and Hungarian parliaments, and is generally determined on the basis of the
population, according to the last census returns. It amounted in 1905 to
103,100 men, of which Austria furnished 59,211 men, and Hungary 43,889.
Besides 10,000 men are annually allotted to the Austrian Landwehr, and
12,500 to the Hungarian Honveds. The term of service is 2 years (3 years in
the cavalry) with the colours, 7 or 8 in the reserve and 2 in the Landwehr;
in the case of men not drafted to the active army the same total period of
service is spent in various special reserves.

For the military and administrative service of the army the Dual Monarchy
is divided into 16 military territorial districts (15 of which correspond
to the 15 army corps) and 108 supplementary districts (105 for the army,
and 3 for the navy). In 1902, since which year no material change was made
in the formal organization of the army, there were 5 cavalry divisions and
31 infantry divisions, formed in 15 army corps, which are located as
follows:--I. Cracow, II. Vienna, III. Graz, IV. Budapest, V. Pressburg, VI.
Kaschau, VII. Temesvár, VIII. Prague, IX. Josefstadt, X. Przemysl,
XI. Lemberg, XII. Herrmannstadt, XIII. Agram, XIV. Innsbruck, XV. Serajewo.
In addition there is the military district of Zara. The usual strength of
the corps is, 2 infantry divisions (4 brigades, 8 or 9 regiments, 32 or 36
battalions), 1 cavalry brigade (18 squadrons), and 1 artillery brigade
(16-18 batteries or 128-144 field-guns), besides technical and departmental
units and in some cases fortress artillery regiments. The infantry is
organized into line regiments, Jäger and Tirolese regiments, the cavalry
into dragoons, lancers, Uhlans and hussars, the artillery into regiments.
The Austrian _Landwehr_ (which retains the old designation _K.K._, formerly
[v.03 p.0004] applied to the Austrian regular army) is organized in 8
divisions of varying strength, the "Royal Hungarian" Landwehr or Honveds in
7 divisions, both Austrian and Hungarian Landwehr having in addition
cavalry (Uhlans and hussars) and artillery. It is probable that a Landwehr
or Honveds division will, in war, form part of each army corps except in
the case of the Vienna corps, which has 3 divisions in peace. The remaining
men of military age (up to 42) as usual form the _Landsturm_. It is to be
noted that this Landsturm comprises many men who would elsewhere be classed
as Landwehr.

The strength of the Austro-Hungarian army on a peace footing was as follows
in 1905:--

  +-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
  |                             |Officers.|    Men. | Horses. |  Guns. |
  +-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+--------+
  | Infantry--                  |         |         |         |        |
  |   Common Army               |  10,801 | 187,604 |   1,152 |    ..  |
  |   Austrian Landwehr         |   1,883 |  23,905 |     174 |    ..  |
  |   Hungarian Honveds         |   2,258 |  21,149 |     262 |    ..  |
  | Cavalry--                   |         |         |         |        |
  |   Common Army               |   1,890 |  45,486 |  40,740 |    ..  |
  |   Austrian Landwehr         |     170 |   1,861 |   1,282 |    ..  |
  |   Hungarian Honveds         |     390 |   4,170 |   3,510 |    ..  |
  | Field Artillery             |   1,630 |  27,612 |  14,520 |  1,048 |
  | Fortress Artillery          |     408 |   7,722 |     131 |    ..  |
  | Technical troops            |     588 |   9,935 |      19 |    ..  |
  | (Pioneers, and Railway and  |         |         |         |        |
  |         Telegraph Regiment) |         |         |         |        |
  |   Transport Service         |     461 |   4,312 |   3,097 |    ..  |
  |   Sanitary Service          |      85 |   3,062 |     ..  |    ..  |
  |                             |  ------ | ------- |  ------ | ------ |
  |                Total        |  20,564 | 336,818 |  64,887 |  1,048 |
  |                             |         |         |         |        |
  | Belonging to the                      |         |         |        |
  |   Common Army               |  15,863 | 285,733 |  59,659 |  1,048 |
  |   Austrian Landwehr         |   2,053 |  25,766 |   1,456 |    ..  |
  |   Hungarian Honveds         |   2,648    25,319 |   3,772      ..  |
  +-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+--------+

The troops stationed in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1905 (376 officers and
6372 men) are included in the total for the common army.

The peace strength of the active army in combatants is thus about 350,000
officers and men, inclusive of the two Landwehrs and of the Austrian "K.K."
guards, the Hungarian crown guards, the gendarmerie, &c. The numbers of the
Landsturm and the war strength of the whole armed forces are not published.
It is estimated that the first line army in war would consist of 460,000
infantry, 49,000 cavalry, 78,000 artillery, 21,000 engineers, &c., beside
train and non-combatant soldiers. The Landwehr and Honved would yield
219,000 infantry and 18,000 cavalry, and other reserves 223,000 men. These
figures give an approximate total strength of 1,147,000, not inclusive of
Landsturm.

_Fortifications._--The principal fortifications in Austria-Hungary are:
Cracow and Przemysl in Galicia; Komárom, the centre of the inland
fortifications, Pétervárad, Ó-Arad and Temesvár in Hungary; Serajewo,
Mostar and Bilek in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The Alpine frontiers, especially
those in Tirol, have numerous fortifications, whose centre is formed by
Trent and Franzensfeste; while all the military roads leading into
Carinthia have been provided with strong defensive works, as at Malborgeth,
Predil Pass, &c. The two capitals, Vienna and Budapest, are not fortified.
On the Adriatic coast, the naval harbour of Pola is strongly fortified with
sea and land defences; then come Trieste, and several places in Dalmatia,
notably Zara and Cattaro.

_Navy._--The Austro-Hungarian navy is mainly a coast defence force, and
includes also a flotilla of monitors for the Danube. It is administered by
the naval department of the ministry of war. It consisted in 1905 of 9
modern battleships, 3 armoured cruisers, 5 cruisers, 4 torpedo gunboats, 20
destroyers and 26 torpedo boats. There was in hand at the same time a naval
programme to build 12 armourclads, 5 second-class cruisers, 6 third-class
cruisers, and a number of torpedo boats. The headquarters of the fleet are
at Pola, which is the principal naval arsenal and harbour of Austria; while
another great naval station is Trieste.

_Trade._--On the basis of the customs and commercial agreement between
Austria and Hungary, concluded in 1867 and renewable every ten years, the
following affairs, in addition to the common affairs of the monarchy, are
in both states treated according to the same principles:--Commercial
affairs, including customs legislation; legislation on the duties closely
connected with industrial production--on beer, brandy, sugar and mineral
oils; determination of legal tender and coinage, as also of the principles
regulating the Austro-Hungarian Bank; ordinances in respect of such
railways as affect the interests of both states. In conformity with the
customs and commercial compact between the two states, renewed in 1899, the
monarchy constitutes one identical customs and commercial territory,
inclusive of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the principality of Liechtenstein.

The foreign trade of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy is shown in the
following table:--

  +--------+-------------+-------------+
  |  Year. |   Imports.  |   Exports.  |
  +--------+-------------+-------------+
  |  1900  | £70,666,000 | £80,916,000 |
  |  1901  |  68,833,000 |  78,841,000 |
  |  1902  |  71,666,000 |  79,708,000 |
  |  1903  |  78,200,000 |  88,600,000 |
  |  1904  |  85,200,000 |  86,200,000 |
  |  1905  |  89,430,000 |  93,500,000 |
  +--------+-------------+-------------+

The following tables give the foreign trade of the Austro-Hungarian
monarchy as regards raw material and manufactured goods:--

                       _Imports._
  +---------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                            |   Value in Millions Sterling.    |
  +----------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+
  |       Articles.            | 1900.| 1901.| 1902.| 1903.| 1904.|
  +----------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+
  | Raw material (including    |      |      |      |      |      |
  |   articles of food; raw    |      |      |      |      |      |
  |   material for agriculture | 41.5 | 40.5 | 41.8 | 45.9 | 51.9 |
  |   and industry; and mining |      |      |      |      |      |
  |   and smelting products.   |      |      |      |      |      |
  | Semi-manufactured goods    |  9.6 |  9.6 | 10.3 | 10.6 | 10.8 |
  | Manufactured Goods         | 19.5 | 18.7 | 19.5 | 21.6 | 22.5 |
  +----------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+

                       _Exports._
  +---------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                            |   Value in Millions Sterling.    |
  +----------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+
  |       Articles.            | 1900.| 1901.| 1902.| 1903.| 1904.|
  +----------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+
  | Raw material (as above)    | 34.1 | 34.1 | 35.9 | 39   | 35.3 |
  | Semi-manufactured goods    | 12.6 | 11.1 | 11.1 | 12.4 | 12.6 |
  | Manufactured goods.        | 34.2 | 33.3 | 32.8 | 37.2 | 38.3 |
  +----------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+

The most important place of derivation and of destination for the
Austro-Hungarian trade is the German empire with about 40% of the imports,
and about 60% of the exports. Next in importance comes Great Britain,
afterwards India, Italy, the United States of America, Russia, France,
Switzerland, Rumania, the Balkan states and South America in about the
order named. The principal articles of import are cotton and cotton goods,
wool and woollen goods, silk and silk goods, coffee, tobacco and metals.
The principal articles of export are wood, sugar, cattle, glass and
glassware, iron and ironware, eggs, cereals, millinery, fancy goods,
earthenware and pottery, and leather goods.

_The Austro-Hungarian Bank._--Common to the two states of the monarchy is
the "Austro-Hungarian Bank," which possesses a legal exclusive right to the
issue of bank-notes. It was founded in 1816, and had the title of the
Austrian National Bank until 1878, when it received its actual name. In
virtue of the new bank statute of the year 1899 the bank is a joint-stock
company, with a stock of £8,780,000. The bank's notes of issue must be
covered to the extent of two-fifths by legal specie (gold and current
silver) in reserve; the rest of the paper circulation, according to bank
usage. The state, under certain conditions, takes a portion of the clear
profits of the bank. The management of the bank and the supervision
exercised over it by the state are established on a footing of equality,
both states having each the same influence. The accounts of the bank at the
end of 1900 were as follows: capital, £8,750,000; reserve fund, £428,250;
note circulation, £62,251,000; cash, £50,754,000. In 1907 the reserve fund
was £548,041; note circulation, £84,501,000; cash, £60,036,625. The charter
of the bank, which expired in 1897, was renewed until the end of 1910. In
the Hungarian ministerial crisis of 1909 the question of the renewal of the
charter played a conspicuous part, the more extreme members of the
Independence party demanding the establishment of separate banks for
Austria and Hungary with, at most, common superintendence (see _History_,
below).

(O. BR.)

HISTORY

I. _The Whole Monarchy._

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: The title "Emperor of Austria."]

The empire of Austria, as the official designation of the territories ruled
by the Habsburg monarchy, dates back only to 1804, when Francis II., the
last of the Holy Roman emperors, proclaimed himself emperor of Austria as
Francis I. His motive in doing so was to guard against the great house of
Habsburg being relegated to a position inferior to the _parvenus_
Bonapartes, in the event of the final collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, or
of the possible election of Napoleon as his own successor on the throne of
Charlemagne. The title emperor of Austria, then, replaced that of
"Imperator Romanorum semper Augustus" when the Holy Empire came to an end
in 1806. From the first, however, it was no more than a title, which
represented but ill the actual relation of the Habsburg sovereigns to their
several states. [v.03 p.0005] Magyars and Slavs never willingly recognized
a style which ignored their national rights and implied the superiority of
the German elements of the monarchy; to the Germans it was a poor
substitute for a title which had represented the political unity of the
German race under the Holy Empire. For long after the Vienna Congress of
1814-1815 the "Kaiser" as such exercised a powerful influence over the
imaginations of the German people outside the Habsburg dominions; but this
was because the title was still surrounded with its ancient halo and the
essential change was not at once recognized. The outcome of the long
struggle with Prussia, which in 1866 finally broke the spell, and the
proclamation of the German empire in 1871 left the title of emperor of
Austria stripped of everything but a purely territorial significance. It
had, moreover, by the compact with Hungary of 1867, ceased even fully to
represent the relation of the emperor to all his dominions; and the title
which had been devised to cover the whole of the Habsburg monarchy sank
into the official style of the sovereign of but a half; while even within
the Austrian empire proper it is resented by those peoples which, like the
Bohemians, wish to obtain the same recognition of their national
independence as was conceded to Hungary. In placing the account of the
origin and development of the Habsburg monarchy under this heading, it is
merely for the sake of convenience.

[Sidenote: Origin of the name Austria.]

The first nucleus round which the present dominions of the house of Austria
gradually accumulated was the mark which lay along the south bank of the
Danube, east of the river Enns, founded about A.D. 800 as a defence for the
Frankish kingdom against the Slavs. Although its total length from east to
west was only about 60 m., it was associated in the popular mind with a
large and almost unbroken tract of land in the east of Europe. This fact,
together with the position of the mark with regard to Germany in general
and to Bavaria in particular, accounts for the name _Österreich_ (Austria),
_i.e._ east empire or realm, a word first used in a charter of 996, where
the phrase _in regione vulgari nomine Ostarrichi_ occurs. The development
of this small mark into the Austro-Hungarian monarchy was a slow and
gradual process, and falls into two main divisions, which almost coincide
with the periods during which the dynasties of Babenberg and Habsburg have
respectively ruled the land. The energies of the house of Babenberg were
chiefly spent in enlarging the area and strengthening the position of the
mark itself, and when this was done the house of Habsburg set itself with
remarkable perseverance and marvellous success to extend its rule over
neighbouring territories. The many vicissitudes which have attended this
development have not, however, altered the European position of Austria,
which has remained the same for over a thousand years. Standing sentinel
over the valley of the middle Danube, and barring the advance of the Slavs
on Germany, Austria, whether mark, duchy or empire, has always been the
meeting-place of the Teuton and the Slav. It is this fact which gives it a
unique interest and importance in the history of Europe, and which unites
the ideas of the Germans to-day with those of Charlemagne and Otto the
Great.

[Sidenote: Early inhabitants.]

The southern part of the country now called Austria was inhabited before
the opening of the Christian era by the Taurisci, a Celtic tribe, who were
subsequently called the Norici, and who were conquered by the Romans about
14 B.C. Their land was afterwards included in the provinces of Pannonia and
Noricum, and under Roman rule, Vindobona, the modern Vienna, became a place
of some importance. The part of the country north of the Danube was peopled
by the Marcomanni and the Quadi, and both of these tribes were frequently
at war with the Romans, especially during the reign of the emperor Marcus
Aurelius, who died at Vindobona in A.D. 180 when campaigning against them.
Christianity and civilization obtained entrance into the land, but the
increasing weakness of the Roman empire opened the country to the inroads
of the barbarians, and during the period of the great migrations it was
ravaged in quick succession by a number of these tribes, prominent among
whom were the Huns. The lands on both banks of the river shared the same
fate, due probably to the fact to which Gibbon has drawn attention, that at
this period the Danube was frequently frozen over. About 590 the district
was settled by the Slovenes, or Corutanes, a Slavonic people, who formed
part of the kingdom of Samo, and were afterwards included in the extensive
kingdom of the Avars. The Franks claimed some authority over this people,
and probably some of the princes of the Slovenes had recognized this claim,
but it could not be regarded as serious while the Avars were in possession
of the land. In 791 Charlemagne, after he had established his authority
over the _Bajuvarii_ or Bavarians, crossed the river Enns, and moved
against the Avars. This attack was followed by campaigns on the part of his
lieutenants, and in 805 the Avars were finally subdued, and their land
incorporated with the Frankish empire. [Sidenote: Establishment of the East
Mark.] This step brought the later Austria definitely under the rule of the
Franks, and during the struggle Charlemagne erected a mark, called the East
Mark, to defend the eastern border of his empire. A series of margraves
ruled this small district from 799 to 907, but as the Frankish empire grew
weaker, the mark suffered more and more from the ravages of its eastern
neighbours. During the 9th century the Frankish supremacy vanished, and the
mark was overrun by the Moravians, and then by the Magyars, or Hungarians,
who destroyed the few remaining traces of Frankish influence.

[Sidenote: The house of Babenberg.]

A new era dawned after Otto the Great was elected German king in 936, and
it is Otto rather than Charlemagne who must be regarded as the real founder
of Austria. In August 955 he gained a great victory over the Magyars on the
Lechfeld, freed Bavaria from their presence, and refounded the East Mark
for the defence of his kingdom. In 976 his son, the emperor Otto II.,
entrusted the government of this mark, soon to be known as Austria, to
Leopold, a member of the family of Babenberg (_q.v._), and its
administration was conducted with vigour and success. Leopold and his
descendants ruled Austria until the extinction of the family in 1246, and
by their skill and foresight raised the mark to an important place among
the German states. Their first care was to push its eastern frontier down
the Danube valley, by colonizing the lands on either side of the river, and
the success of this work may be seen in the removal of their capital from
Pöchlarn to Melk, then to Tulln, and finally about 1140 to Vienna. The
country as far as the Leitha was subsequently incorporated with Austria,
and in the other direction the district between the Enns and the Inn was
added to the mark in 1156, an important date in Austrian history.
[Sidenote: Duchy of Austria created, 1156.] Anxious to restore peace to
Germany in this year, the new king, Frederick I., raised Austria to the
rank of a duchy, and conferred upon it exceptional privileges. The
investiture was bestowed not only upon Duke Henry but upon his second wife,
Theodora; in case of a failure of male heirs the duchy was to descend to
females; and if the duke had no children he could nominate his successor.
Controlling all the jurisdiction of the land, the duke's only duties
towards the Empire were to appear at any diet held in Bavaria, and to send
a contingent to the imperial army for any campaigns in the countries
bordering upon Austria. In 1186 Duke Leopold I. made a treaty with Ottakar
IV., duke of Styria, an arrangement which brought Styria and upper Austria
to the Babenbergs in 1192, and in 1229 Duke Leopold II. purchased some
lands from the bishop of Freising, and took the title of lord of Carniola.
When the house of Babenberg became extinct in 1246, Austria, stretching
from Passau almost to Pressburg, had the frontiers which it retains to-day,
and this increase of territory had been accompanied by a corresponding
increase in wealth and general prosperity. The chief reason for this
prosperity was the growth of trade along the Danube, which stimulated the
foundation, or the growth, of towns, and brought considerable riches to the
ruler. Under the later Babenbergs Vienna was regarded as one of the most
important of German cities, and it was computed that the duke was as rich
as the archbishop of Cologne, or the margrave of Brandenburg, and was
surpassed in this respect by only one German prince, the [v.03 p.0006] king
of Bohemia. The interests of the Austrian margraves and dukes were not
confined to the acquisition of wealth either in land or chattels. Vienna
became a centre of culture and learning, and many religious houses were
founded and endowed. [Sidenote: Duke Leopold II.] The acme of the early
prosperity of Austria was reached under Duke Leopold II., surnamed the
Glorious, who reigned from 1194 to 1230. He gave a code of municipal law to
Vienna, and rights to other towns, welcomed the Minnesingers to his
brilliant court, and left to his subjects an enduring memory of valour and
wisdom. Leopold and his predecessors were enabled, owing to the special
position of Austria, to act practically as independent rulers. Cherishing
the privilege of 1156, they made treaties with foreign kings, and arranged
marriages with the great families of Europe. With full control of
jurisdiction and of commerce, no great bishopric nor imperial city impeded
the course of their authority, and the emperor interfered only to settle
boundary disputes.

[Sidenote: Duke Frederick II., the Quarrelsome.]

The main lines of Austrian policy under the Babenbergs were warfare with
the Hungarians and other eastern neighbours, and a general attitude of
loyalty towards the emperors. The story of the Hungarian wars is a
monotonous record of forays, of assistance given at times to the Babenbergs
by the forces of the Empire, and ending in the gradual eastward advance of
Austria. The traditional loyalty to the emperors, which was cemented by
several marriages between the imperial house and the Babenbergs, was,
however, departed from by the margrave Leopold II., and by Duke Frederick
II. During the investiture struggle Leopold deserted the emperor Henry IV.,
who deprived him of Austria and conferred it upon Vratislav II., duke of
the Bohemians. Unable to maintain his position, Vratislav was soon driven
out, and in 1083 Leopold again obtained possession of the mark, and was
soon reconciled with Henry. Very similar was the result of the conflict
between the emperor Frederick II. and Duke Frederick II. Ignoring the the
privilege of 1156, the emperor claimed certain rights in Austria, and
summoned the duke to his Italian diets. Frederick, who was called the
Quarrelsome, had irritated both his neighbours and his subjects, and
complaints of his exactions and confiscations reached the ears of the
emperor. After the duke had three times refused to appear before the
princes, Frederick placed him under the ban, declared the duchies of
Austria and Styria to be vacant, and, aided by the king of Bohemia, the
duke of Bavaria and other princes, invaded the country in 1236. [Sidenote:
End of the House of Babenberg.] He met with very slight opposition,
declared the duchies to be immediately dependent upon the Empire, made
Vienna an imperial city, and imposed other changes upon the constitution of
Austria. After his departure, however, the duke returned, and in 1239 was
in possession of his former power, while the changes made by the emperor
were ignored. Continuing his career of violence and oppression, Duke
Frederick was killed in battle by the Hungarians in June 1246, when the
family of Babenberg became extinct.

[Sidenote: Dispute as to the Austrian succession.]

The duchies of Austria and Styria were now claimed by the emperor Frederick
II. as vacant fiefs of the Empire, and their government was entrusted to
Otto II., duke of Bavaria. Frederick, however, who was in Italy, harassed
and afflicted, could do little to assert the imperial authority, and his
enemy, Pope Innocent IV., bestowed the two duchies upon Hermann VI.,
margrave of Baden, whose wife, Gertrude, was a niece of the last of the
Babenbergs. Hermann was invested by the German king, William, count of
Holland, but he was unable to establish his position, and law and order
were quickly disappearing from the duchies. The deaths of Hermann and of
the emperor in 1250, however, paved the way for a settlement. Weary of
struggle and disorder, and despairing of any help from the central
authority, the estates of Austria met at Trübensee in 1251, and chose
Ottakar, son of Wenceslaus I., king of Bohemia, as their duke. [Sidenote:
Ottakar of Bohemia, duke.] This step was favoured by the pope, and Ottakar,
eagerly accepting the offer, strengthened his position by marrying
Margaret, a sister of Duke Frederick II., and in return for his investiture
promised his assistance to William of Holland. Styria appears at this time
to have shared the fortunes of Austria, but it was claimed by Bela IV.,
king of Hungary, who conquered the land, and made a treaty with Ottakar in
1254 which confirmed him in its possession. The Hungarian rule was soon
resented by the Styrians, and Ottakar, who had become king of Bohemia in
1253, took advantage of this resentment, and interfered in the affairs of
the duchy. A war with Hungary was the result, but on this occasion victory
rested with Ottakar, and by a treaty made with Bela, in March 1261, he was
recognized as duke of Styria. In 1269 Ottakar inherited the duchy of
Carinthia on the death of Duke Ulrich III., and, his power having now
become very great, he began to aspire to the German throne. He did
something to improve the condition of the duchies by restoring order,
introducing German colonists into the eastern districts, and seeking to
benefit the inhabitants of the towns.

[Sidenote: Rudolph of Habsburg.]

In 1273 Rudolph, count of Habsburg, became German king, and his attention
soon turned to Ottakar, whose power menaced the occupant of the German
throne. Finding some support in Austria, Rudolph questioned the title of
the Bohemian king to the three duchies, and sought to recover the imperial
lands which had been in the possession of the emperor Frederick II. Ottakar
was summoned twice before the diet, the imperial court declared against
him, and in July 1275 he was placed under the ban. War was the result, and
in November 1276 Ottakar submitted to Rudolph, and renounced the duchies of
Austria, Styria and Carinthia. For some time the three duchies were
administered by Rudolph in his capacity as head of the Empire, of which
they formed part. Not content with this tie, however, which was personal to
himself alone, the king planned to make them hereditary possessions of his
family, and to transfer the headquarters of the Habsburgs from the Rhine to
the Danube. [Sidenote: The Habsburgs established in Austria, 1282.] Some
opposition was offered to this scheme; but the perseverance of the king
overcame all difficulties, and one of the most important events in European
history took place on the 27th of December 1282, when Rudolph invested his
sons, Rudolph and Albert, with the duchies of Austria and Styria. He
retained Carinthia in his own hands until 1286, when, in return for
valuable services, he bestowed it upon Meinhard IV., count of Tirol. The
younger Rudolph took no part in the government of Austria and Styria, which
was undertaken by Albert, until his election as German king in 1298. Albert
appears to have been rather an arbitrary ruler. In 1288 he suppressed a
rising of the people of Vienna, and he made the fullest use of the ducal
power in asserting his real or supposed rights. At this time the principle
of primogeniture was unknown in the house of Habsburg, and for many years
the duchies were ruled in common by two, or even three, members of the
family. After Albert became German king, his two elder sons, Rudolph and
Frederick, were successively associated with him in the government, and
after his death in 1308, his four younger sons shared at one time or
another in the administration of Austria and Styria. In 1314 Albert's son,
Frederick, was chosen German king in opposition to Louis IV., duke of Upper
Bavaria, afterwards the emperor Louis IV., and Austria was weakened by the
efforts of the Habsburgs to sustain Frederick in his contest with Louis,
and also by the struggle carried on between another brother, Leopold, and
the Swiss. A series of deaths among the Habsburgs during the first half of
the 14th century left Duke Albert II. and his four sons as the only
representatives of the family. Albert ruled the duchies alone from 1344 to
1356, and after this date his sons began to take part in the government.
[Sidenote: Duke Rudolph IV.] The most noteworthy of these was Duke Rudolph
IV., a son-in-law of the emperor Charles IV., who showed his interest in
learning by founding the university of Vienna in 1365. Rudolph's chief aim
was to make Austria into an independent state, and he forged a series of
privileges the purport of which was to free the duchy from all its duties
towards the Empire. A sharp contest with the emperor followed this
proceeding, and the Austrian duke, annoyed that [v.03 p.0007] Austria was
not raised to the dignity of an electorate by the Golden Bull of 1356, did
not shrink from a contest with Charles. In 1361, however, he abandoned his
pretensions, but claimed the title of archduke (_q.v._) and in 1364
declared that the possessions of the Habsburgs were indivisible. Meanwhile
the acquisition of neighbouring territories had been steadily pressed on.
In 1335 the duchy of Carinthia, and a part of Carniola, were inherited by
Dukes Albert II. and Otto, and in 1363 Rudolph IV. obtained the county of
Tirol. In 1364 Carniola was made into an hereditary duchy; in 1374 part of
Istria came under the rule of the Habsburgs; in 1382 Trieste submitted
voluntarily to Austria, and at various times during the century, other
smaller districts were added to the lands of the Habsburgs.

Rudolph IV. died childless in 1365, and in 1379 his two remaining brothers,
Leopold III. and Albert III., made a division of their lands, by which
Albert retained Austria proper and Carniola, and Leopold got Styria,
Carinthia and Tirol. Leopold was killed in 1386 at the battle of Sempach,
and Albert became guardian for his four nephews, who subsequently ruled
their lands in common. The senior line which ruled in Austria was
represented after the death of Duke Albert III. in 1395 by his son, Duke
Albert IV., and then by his grandson, Duke Albert V., who became German
king as Albert II. in 1438. [Sidenote: Minority of Ladislaus.] Albert
married Elizabeth, daughter of Sigismund, king of Hungary and Bohemia, and
on the death of his father-in-law assumed these two crowns. He died in
1439, and just after his death a son was born to him, who was called
Ladislaus Posthumus, and succeeded to the duchy of Austria and to the
kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia. William and Leopold, the two eldest sons
of Duke Leopold III., and, with their younger brothers Ernest and
Frederick, the joint rulers of Styria, Carinthia and Tirol, died early in
the 15th century, and in 1406 Ernest and Frederick made a division of their
lands. Ernest became duke of Styria and Carinthia, and Frederick, count of
Tirol. Ernest was succeeded in 1424 by his sons, Frederick and Albert, and
Frederick in 1439 by his son, Sigismund, and these three princes were
reigning when King Albert II. died in 1439. Frederick, who succeeded Albert
[Sidenote: Regency of the emperor Frederick III.] as German king, and was
soon crowned emperor as Frederick III., acted as guardian for Sigismund of
Tirol, who was a minor, and also became regent of Austria in consequence of
the infancy of Ladislaus. His rule was a period of struggle and disorder,
owing partly to the feebleness of his own character, partly to the wish of
his brother, Albert, to share his dignities. The Tirolese soon grew weary
of his government, and, in 1446, Sigismund was declared of age. [Sidenote:
Popular revolt under Ulrich Eiczing and Count Ulrich of Cilli.] The estates
of Austria were equally discontented and headed an open revolt, the object
of which was to remove Ladislaus from Frederick's charge and deprive the
latter of the regency. The leading spirit in this movement was Ulrich
Eiczing (Eitzing or von Eiczinger, d. before 1463), a low-born adventurer,
ennobled by Albert II., in whose service he had accumulated vast wealth and
power. In 1451 he organized an armed league, and in December, with the aid
of the populace, made himself master of Vienna, whither he had summoned the
estates. In March 1452 he was joined by Count Ulrich of Cilli, while the
Hungarians and the powerful party of the great house of Rosenberg in
Bohemia attached themselves to the league. Frederick, who had hurried back
from Italy, was besieged in August in the Vienna Neustadt, and was forced
to deliver Ladislaus to Count Ulrich, whose influence had meanwhile
eclipsed that of Eiczing. Ladislaus now ruled nominally himself, under the
tutelage of Count Ulrich. The country was, however, distracted by quarrels
between the party of the high aristocracy, which recognized the count of
Cilli as its chief, and that of the lesser nobles, citizens and populace,
who followed Eiczing. In September 1453 the latter, by a successful
_émeute_, succeeded in ousting Count Ulrich, and remained in power till
February 1455, when the count once more entered Vienna in triumph. Ulrich
of Cilli was killed before Belgrade in November 1456; a year later
Ladislaus himself died (November 1457). Meanwhile Styria and Carinthia
[Sidenote: Austria created an archduchy.] were equally unfortunate under
the rule of Frederick and Albert; and the death of Ladislaus led to still
further complications. Austria, which had been solemnly created an
archduchy by the emperor Frederick in 1453, was claimed by the three
remaining Habsburg princes, and lower Austria was secured by Frederick,
while Albert obtained upper Austria. Both princes were unpopular, and in
1462 Frederick was attacked by the inhabitants of Vienna, and was forced to
surrender lower Austria to Albert, whose spendthrift habits soon made his
rule disliked. A further struggle between the brothers was prevented by
Albert's death in 1463, when the estates did homage to Frederick.
[Sidenote: Hungarian conquest of Austria.] The emperor was soon again at
issue with the Austrian nobles, and was attacked by Matthias Corvinus, king
of Hungary, who drove him from Vienna in 1485. Although hampered by the
inroads of the Turks, Matthias pressed on, and by 1487 was firmly in
possession of Austria, Styria and Carinthia, which seemed quite lost to the
Habsburgs.

[Sidenote: The emperor Maximilian I.]

The decline in the fortunes of the family, however, was to be arrested by
Frederick's son, Maximilian, afterwards the emperor Maximilian I., who was
the second founder of the greatness of the house of Habsburg. Like his
ancestor, Rudolph, he had to conquer the lands over which his descendants
were destined to rule, and by arranging a treaty of succession to the
kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, he pointed the way to power and empire in
eastern Europe. Soon after his election as king of the Romans in 1486,
Maximilian attacked the Hungarians, and in 1490 he had driven them from
Austria, and recovered his hereditary lands. In the same year he made an
arrangement with his kinsman, Sigismund of Tirol, by which he brought this
county under his rule, and when the emperor Frederick died in 1493,
Maximilian united the whole of the Austrian lands under his sway.
Continuing his acquisitions of territory, he inherited the possessions of
the counts of Görz in 1500, added some districts to Tirol by intervening in
a succession war in Bavaria, and acquired Gradisca in 1512 as the result of
a struggle with Venice. He did much for the better government of the
Austrian duchies. Bodies were established for executive, financial and
judicial purposes, the Austrian lands constituted one of the imperial
circles which were established in 1512, and in 1518 representatives of the
various diets (_Landtage_) met at Innsbruck, a proceeding which marks the
beginning of an organic unity in the Austrian lands. In these ways
Maximilian proved himself a capable and energetic ruler, although his plans
for making Austria into a kingdom, or an electorate, were abortive.

[Sidenote: Austria at the close of the middle ages.]

At the close of the middle ages the area of Austria had increased to nearly
50,000 sq. m., but its internal condition does not appear to have improved
in proportion to this increase in size. The rulers of Austria lacked the
prestige which attached to the electoral office, and, although five of them
had held the position of German king, the four who preceded Maximilian had
added little or nothing to the power and dignity of this position. The
ecclesiastical organization of Austria was imperfect, so long as there was
no archbishopric within its borders, and its clergy owed allegiance to
foreign prelates. The work of unification which was so successfully
accomplished by Maximilian was aided by two events, the progress of the
Turks in south-eastern Europe, and the loss of most of the Habsburg
possessions on the Rhine. The first tended to draw the separate states
together for purposes of defence, and the second turned the attention of
the Habsburgs to the possibilities of expansion in eastern Europe.

(A. W. H.*)

[Sidenote: Austria under Charles V. and Ferdinand.]

At the time of the death of the emperor Maximilian in 1519 the Habsburg
dominions in eastern Germany included the duchies of Upper and Lower
Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola and the county of Tirol. Maximilian
was succeeded as archduke of Austria as well as emperor by his grandson
Charles of Spain, known in history as the emperor Charles V. To his brother
Ferdinand Charles resigned all his Austrian lands, including his claims on
Bohemia [v.03 p.0008] and Hungary. [Sidenote: Mohács and its results.]
Austria and Spain were thus divided, and, in spite of the efforts of the
archduke Charles in the Spanish Succession War, were never again united,
for at the battle of Mohács, on the 28th of August 1526, Suleiman the
Magnificent defeated and killed Louis, king of Bohemia and of Hungary,
whose sister Anne had married Ferdinand. By this victory the Turks
conquered and retained, till the peace of Karlowitz in 1699, the greater
part of Hungary. During most of his life Ferdinand was engaged in combating
the Turks and in attempting to secure Hungary. In John Zápolya, who was
supported by Suleiman, Ferdinand found an active rival. The Turks besieged
Vienna in 1530 and made several invasions of Hungary and Austria. At length
Ferdinand agreed to pay Suleiman an annual tribute for the small
portion--about 12,228 sq. m.--of Hungary which he held. [Sidenote: Charles
V. and Austria.] During Charles V.'s struggles with the German Protestants,
Ferdinand preserved a neutral attitude, which contributed to gain Germany a
short period of internal peace. Though Ferdinand himself did not take a
leading part in German religious or foreign politics, the period was one of
intense interest to Austria. Throughout the years from 1519 to 1648 there
are, said Stubbs, two distinct ideas in progress which "may be regarded as
giving a unity to the whole period.... The Reformation is one, the claims
of the House of Austria is the other." Austria did not benefit from the
reign of Charles V. The emperor was too much absorbed in the affairs of the
rest of his vast dominions, notably those of the Empire, rent in two by
religious differences and the secular ambitions for which those were the
excuse, to give any effective attention to its needs. The peace of
Augsburg, 1555, which recognized a dualism within the Empire in religion as
in politics, marked the failure of his plan of union (see CHARLES V.;
GERMANY; MAURICE OF SAXONY); and meanwhile he had been able to accomplish
nothing to rescue Hungary from the Turkish yoke. It was left for his
brother Ferdinand, a ruler of consummate wisdom (1556-1564) "to establish
the modern Habsburg-Austrian empire with its exclusive territorial
interests, its administrative experiments, its intricacies of religion and
of race."

[Sidenote: The policy of Ferdinand and Maximillian II.]

Before his death Ferdinand divided the inheritance of the German Habsburgs
between his three sons. Austria proper was left to his eldest son
Maximilian, Tirol to the archduke Ferdinand; and Styria with Carinthia and
Carniola to the archduke Charles. Under the emperor Maximilian II.
(1564-1576), who was also king of Bohemia and Hungary, a liberal policy
preserved peace, but he was unable to free his government from its
humiliating position of a tributary to the Turk, and he could do nothing to
found religious liberty within his dominions on a permanent basis. The
whole of Austria and nearly the whole of Styria were mainly Lutheran; in
Bohemia, Silesia and Moravia, various forms of Christian belief struggled
for mastery; and Catholicism was almost confined to the mountains of Tirol.
[Sidenote: The reign of Rudolph II.] The accession of Rudolph II.[1]
(1576-1612), a fanatical Spanish Catholic, changed the situation entirely.
Under him the Jesuits were encouraged to press on the counter-Reformation.
In the early part of his reign there was hardly any government at all. In
Bohemia a state of semi-independence existed, while Hungary preferred
[Sidenote: The family compact, 1606.] the Turk to the emperor. In both
kingdoms Rudolph had failed to assert his sovereign power except in fitful
attempts to extirpate heresy. With anarchy prevalent within the Austrian
dominions some action became necessary. Accordingly in 1606 the archdukes
made a compact agreeing to acknowledge the archduke Matthias as head of the
family. This arrangement proved far from successful. Matthias, who was
emperor from 1612 to 1619, proved unable to restore order, and when he died
Bohemia was practically independent. His successor Ferdinand II.
(1619-1637) was strong of will; and resolved to win back Germany to the
Catholic faith. As archduke of Styria he had crushed out Protestantism
[Sidenote: The Thirty Years' War.] in that duchy, and having been elected
king of Bohemia in 1618 was resolved to establish there the rule of the
Jesuits. His attempt to do so led to the outbreak of the Thirty Years' War
(see BOHEMIA; THIRTY YEARS' WAR). Till 1630 the fortunes of Austria
brightened under the active rule of Ferdinand, who was assisted by
Maximilian of Bavaria and the Catholic League, and by Wallenstein. The
Palatinate was conquered, the Danish king was overthrown, and it seemed
that Austria would establish its predominance over the whole of Germany,
and that the Baltic would become an Austrian lake. The fortunes of Austria
never seemed brighter than in 1628 when Wallenstein began the siege of
Stralsund. [Sidenote: The Swedish and French intervention.] His failure,
followed by the arrival of Gustavus Adolphus in Germany in 1630, proved the
death blow of Austrian hopes. In 1632 Gustavus Adolphus was killed, in 1634
Wallenstein was assassinated, and in 1635 France entered into the war. The
Thirty Years' War now ceased to be a religious struggle between Catholicism
and Protestantism; it resolved itself into a return to the old political
strife between France and the Habsburgs. [Sidenote: The peace of
Westphalia, 1648.] Till 1648 the Bourbon and Habsburg powers continued the
war, and at the peace of Westphalia Austria suffered severe losses.
Ferdinand III. (1637-1657) was forced to yield Alsace to France, to grant
territorial supremacy, including the right of making alliances, to the
states of the Empire, and to acknowledge the concurrent jurisdiction of the
imperial chamber and the Aulic council. The disintegration of the Holy
Roman Empire was now practically accomplished, and though the possession of
the imperial dignity continued to give the rulers of Austria prestige, the
Habsburgs henceforward devoted themselves to their Austrian interests
rather than to those of the Empire.

[Sidenote: Leopold I.]

In 1657 Leopold I., who had already ruled the Austrian dominions for two
years, succeeded his father Ferdinand and was crowned emperor in the
following year. His long reign of 48 years was of great importance for
Austria, as determining both the internal character and the external policy
of the monarchy. The long struggle with France to which the ambitions of
Louis XIV. gave rise, and which culminated in the War of Spanish
Succession, belongs less to the history of Austria proper than to that of
Germany and of Europe. [Sidenote: Wars with Turkey.] Of more importance to
Austria itself was the war with Sweden (1657-60) which resulted in the
peace of Oliva, by which the independence of Poland was secured and the
frontier of Hungary safeguarded, and the campaigns against the Turks
(1662-64 and 1683-99), by which the Ottoman power was driven from Hungary,
and the Austrian attitude towards Turkey and the Slav peoples of the
Balkans determined for a century to come. The first war, due to Ottoman
aggression in Transylvania, ended with Montecuculi's victory over the grand
vizier at St Gothard on the Raab on the 1st of August 1664. The general
political situation prevented Leopold from taking full advantage of this,
and the peace of Vasvár (August 10) left the Turks in possession of
Nagyvarad (Grosswardein) and the fortress of Érsekujvár (Neuhäusel),
Transylvania being recognized as an independent principality. The next
Turkish war was the direct outcome of Leopold's policy in Hungary, where
the persecution of the Protestants and the suppression of the constitution
in 1658, led to a widespread conspiracy. This was mercilessly suppressed;
and though after a period of arbitrary government (1672-1679), the
palatinate and the constitution, with certain concessions to the
Protestants, were restored, the discontent continued. In 1683, invited by
Hungarian malcontents and spurred on by Louis XIV., the Turks burst into
Hungary, overran the country and appeared before the walls of Vienna. The
victory of the 12th of September, gained over the Turks by John Sobieski
(see JOHN III. SOBIESKI, KING OF POLAND) not only saved the Austrian
capital, but was the first of a series of successes which drove the Turks
permanently beyond the Danube, and established the power of Austria in the
East. The victories of Charles of Lorraine at Párkány (1683) and Esztergom
(Gran) (1685) were followed by the capture of Budapest (1686) and the
defeat of the Ottomans at [v.03 p.0009] Mohács (1688). In 1688 the elector
took Belgrade; in 1691 Louis William I. of Baden won the battle of
Slankamen, and on the 11th of September 1697 Prince Eugene gained the
crowning victory of Zenta. This was followed, on the 26th of January 1699,
by the peace of Karlowitz, by which Slavonia, Transylvania and all Hungary,
except the banat of Temesvár, were ceded to the Austrian crown. Leopold had
wisely decided to initiate a conciliatory policy in Hungary. At the diet of
Pressburg (1687-1688) the Hungarian crown had been made hereditary in the
house of Habsburg, and the crown prince Joseph had been crowned hereditary
king of Hungary (_q.v._). In 1697 Transylvania was united to the Hungarian
monarchy. A further fact of great prospective importance was the
immigration, after an abortive rising against the Turks, of some 30,000
Slav and Albanian families into Slavonia and southern Hungary, where they
were granted by the emperor Leopold a certain autonomy and the recognition
of the Orthodox religion.

By the conquest of Hungary and Transylvania Leopold completed the edifice
of the Austrian monarchy, of which the foundations had been laid by
Ferdinand I. in 1526. He had also done much for its internal consolidation.
By the death of the archduke Sigismund in 1665 he not only gained Tirol,
but a considerable sum of money, which he used to buy back the Silesian
principalities of Oppeln and Ratibor, pledged by Ferdinand III. to the
Poles. In the administration of his dominions, too, Leopold succeeded in
strengthening the authority of the central government. The old estates,
indeed, survived; but the emperor kept the effective power in his own
hands, and to his reign are traceable the first beginnings of that system
of centralized bureaucracy which was established under Maria Theresa and
survived, for better or for worse, till the revolution of 1848. It was
under Leopold, also, that the Austrian standing army was established in
spite of much opposition; the regiments raised in 1672 were never
disbanded. For the intellectual life of the country Leopold did much. In
spite of his intolerant attitude towards religious dissent, he proved
himself an enlightened patron of learning. He helped in the establishment
of the universities of Innsbruck and Olmütz; and under his auspices, after
the defeat of the Turks in 1683, Vienna began to develop from a mere
frontier fortress into one of the most brilliant capitals of Europe. (See
LEOPOLD I.)

[Sidenote: War of Spanish Succession.]

Leopold died in 1705 during the war of Spanish Succession (1702-13), which
he left as an evil inheritance to his sons Joseph I. (d. 1711) and Charles
VI. The result of the war was a further aggrandizement of the house of
Austria; but not to the extent that had been hoped. Apart from the fact
that British and Austrian troops had been unable to deprive Philip V. of
his throne, it was from the point of view of Europe at large by no means
desirable that Charles VI. should succeed in reviving the empire of Charles
V. By the treaty of Utrecht, accordingly, Spain was left to the House of
Bourbon, while that of Austria received the Spanish Netherlands, Sardinia
and Naples.

[Sidenote: Austria from 1715 to 1740.]

The treaty of Karlowitz, and the settlement of 1713-1714, marked a new
starting-point in the history of Austria. The efforts of Turkey to regain
her ascendancy in eastern Europe at the expense of the Habsburgs had ended
in failure, and henceforward Turkish efforts were confined to resisting the
steady development of Austria in the direction of Constantinople. The
treaties of Utrecht, Rastadt and Baden had also re-established and
strengthened the position of the Austrian monarchy in western Europe. The
days of French invasions of Germany had for the time ceased, and revenge
for the attacks made by Louis XIV. was found in the establishment of
Austrian supremacy in Italy and in the substitution of Austrian for Spanish
domination in the Netherlands.

The situation, though apparently favourable, was full of difficulty, and
only a statesman of uncommon dexterity could have guided Austria with
success through the ensuing years. Composed of a congeries of nationalities
which included Czechs, Magyars, Ruthenes, Rumanians, Germans, Italians,
Flemings and other races, and with territories separated by many miles, the
Habsburg dominions required from their ruler patience, tolerance,
administrative skill and a full knowledge of the currents of European
diplomacy. Charles VI. possessed none of these qualities; and when he died
in 1740, the weakness of the scattered Habsburg empire rendered it an
object of the cupidity of the continental powers. Yet, though the War of
Spanish Succession had proved a heavy drain on the resources of the
hereditary dominions of the Austrian crown, Charles VI. had done much to
compensate for this by the successes of his arms in eastern Europe. In
1716, in alliance with Venice, he declared war on the Turks; Eugene's
victory at Peterwardein involved the conquest of the banat of Temesvár, and
was followed in 1717 by the capture of Belgrade. By the treaty signed at
Passarowitz on the 21st of July 1718, the banat, which rounded off Hungary
and Belgrade, with the northern districts of Servia, were annexed to the
Habsburg monarchy.

Important as these gains were, the treaty none the less once more
illustrated the perpetual sacrifice of the true interests of the hereditary
dominions of the house of Habsburg to its European entanglements. Had the
war continued, Austria would undoubtedly have extended her conquests down
the Danube. But Charles was anxious about Italy, then in danger from Spain,
which under Alberoni's guidance had occupied Sardinia and Sicily. On the
2nd of August 1718, accordingly, Charles joined the Triple Alliance,
henceforth the Quadruple Alliance. The coercion of Spain resulted in a
peace by which Charles obtained Sicily in exchange for Sardinia. The
shifting of the balance of power that followed belongs to the history of
Europe (_q.v._); for Austria the only important outcome was that in 1731
Charles found himself isolated. [Sidenote: The Pragmatic Sanction.] Being
without a son, he was now anxious to secure the throne for his daughter
Maria Theresa, in accordance with the Pragmatic Sanction of the 19th of
April 1713, in which he had pronounced the indivisibility of the monarchy,
and had settled the succession on his daughter, in default of a male heir.
It now became his object to secure the adhesion of the powers to this
instrument. In 1731 Great Britain and Holland agreed to respect it, in
return for the cession of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla to Don Carlos; but
the hostility of the Bourbon powers continued, resulting in 1733 in the War
of Polish Succession, the outcome of which was the acquisition of Lorraine
by France, and of Naples, Sicily and the Tuscan ports by Don Carlos, while
the power of the Habsburg monarchy in northern Italy was strengthened by
the acquisition of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla. At the same time Spain
and Sardinia adhered to the Pragmatic Sanction. Francis, the dispossessed
duke of Lorraine, was to be compensated with Tuscany. On the 12th of
February 1736 he was married to the archduchess Maria Theresa, and on the
11th of May following he signed the formal act ceding Lorraine to France.

[Sidenote: Treaty of Belgrade, 1739.]

The last years of Charles VI. were embittered by the disastrous outcome of
the war with Turkey (1738-1739), on which he had felt compelled to embark
in accordance with the terms of a treaty of alliance with Russia signed in
1726. After a campaign of varying fortunes the Turks beat the imperial
troops at Krotzka on the 23rd of July 1739 and laid siege to Belgrade,
where on the 1st of September a treaty was signed, which, with the
exception of the banat, surrendered everything that Austria had gained by
the treaty of Passarowitz. On the 20th of October 1740, Charles died,
leaving his dominions in no condition to resist the attacks of the powers,
which, in spite of having adhered to the Pragmatic Sanction, now sought to
profit from their weakness. Yet for their internal development Charles had
done much. His religious attitude was moderate and tolerant, and he did his
best to promote the enlightenment of his subjects. He was zealous, too, for
the promotion of trade and industry, and, besides the East India Company
which he established at Ostend, he encouraged the development of Trieste
and Fiume as sea-ports and centres of trade with the Levant.

[Sidenote: Maria Theresa.]

[v.03 p.0010] The accession of Maria Theresa to the throne of the Habsburgs
marks an important epoch in the history of Austria. For a while, indeed, it
seemed that the monarchy was on the point of dissolution. To the diplomacy
of the 18th century the breach of a solemn compact was but lightly
regarded; and Charles VI. had neglected the advice of Prince Eugene to
leave an effective army of 200,000 men as a more solid guarantee of the
Pragmatic Sanction than the signatures of the powers. As it was, the
Austrian forces, disorganized in the long confusion of the Turkish wars,
were in no condition to withstand Frederick the Great, when in 1740, at the
head of the splendid army bequeathed to him by his father, he invaded
Silesia (see AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION, WAR OF). The Prussian victory at Mollwitz
(April 10, 1741) brought into the field against Austria all the powers
which were ambitious of expansion at her expense: France, Bavaria, Spain,
Saxony and Sardinia. Nor was the peril wholly external. Apart from the
perennial discontents of Magyars and Slavs, the confusion and corruption of
the administration, and the misery caused by the ruin of the finances, had
made the Habsburg dynasty unpopular even in its German states, and in
Vienna itself a large section of public opinion was loudly in favour of the
claims of Charles of Bavaria. Yet the war, if it revealed the weakness of
the Austrian monarchy, revealed also unexpected sources of strength. Not
the least of these was the character of Maria Theresa herself, who to the
fascination of a young and beautiful woman added a very masculine
resolution and judgment. In response to her personal appeal, and also to
her wise and timely concessions, the Hungarians had rallied to her support,
and for the first time in history awoke not only to a feeling of
enthusiastic loyalty to a Habsburg monarch, but also to the realization
that their true interests were bound up with those of Austria (see HUNGARY:
_History_). Although, then, as the result of the war, Silesia was by the
treaty of Dresden transferred from Austria to Prussia, while in Italy by
the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748 cessions were made at the expense of
the house of Habsburg to the Spanish Don Philip and to Sardinia, the
Austrian monarchy as a whole had displayed a vitality that had astonished
the world, and was in some respects stronger than at the beginning of the
struggle, notably in the great improvement in the army and in the
possession of generals schooled by the experience of active service.

The period from 1747 to 1756, the year of the outbreak of the Seven Years'
War, was occupied in preparations for carrying into effect the
determination of Maria Theresa to recover the lost provinces. To give any
chance of success, it was recognized that a twofold change of system was
necessary: in internal and in external affairs. To strengthen the state
internally a complete revolution of its administration was begun under the
auspices of Count F. W. Haugwitz (1700-1765); the motley system which had
survived from the middle ages was gradually replaced by an administrative
machinery uniformly organized and centralized; and the army especially,
hitherto patched together from the quotas raised and maintained by the
various diets and provincial estates, was withdrawn from their
interference. These reforms were practically confined to the central
provinces of the monarchy; for in Hungary, as well as in the outlying
territories of Lombardy and the Netherlands, it was recognized that the
conservative temper of the peoples made any revolutionary change in the
traditional system inadvisable.

[Sidenote: Austrian-French alliance, and Seven Years' War.]

Meanwhile, in foreign affairs, it had become clear that for Austria the
enemy to be dreaded was no longer France, but Prussia, and Kaunitz prepared
the way for a diplomatic revolution, which took effect when, on the 1st of
May 1756, Austria and France concluded the first treaty of Versailles. The
long rivalry between Bourbons and Habsburgs was thus ended, and France and
Austria remained in alliance or at peace until the outbreak of the French
Revolution. So far as Austria was concerned, the Seven Years' War (_q.v._)
in which France and Austria were ranged against Prussia and Great Britain,
was an attempt on the part of Maria Theresa to recover Silesia. It failed;
and the peace of Hubertsburg, signed on the 15th of February 1763, left
Germany divided between Austria and Prussia, whose rivalry for the hegemony
was to last until the victory of Königgrätz (1866) definitely decided the
issue in favour of the Hohenzollern monarchy.

[Sidenote: Austria and Bavaria.]

The loss of Silesia led Austria to look for "compensation" elsewhere. The
most obvious direction in which this could be sought was in Bavaria, ruled
by the decadent house of Wittelsbach, the secular rival of the house of
Habsburg in southern Germany. The question of the annexation of Bavaria by
conquest or exchange had occupied the minds of Austrian statesmen
throughout the century: it would not only have removed a perpetual menace
to the peace of Austria, but would have given to the Habsburg monarchy an
overwhelming strength in South Germany. The matter came to an issue in
1777, on the death of the elector Maximilian III. The heir was the elector
palatine Charles Theodore, but Joseph II., who had been elected emperor in
1765, in succession to his father, and appointed co-regent with his
mother--claimed the inheritance, and prepared to assert his claims by
force. The result was the so-called War of Bavarian Succession. As a matter
of fact, however, though the armies under Frederick and Joseph were face to
face in the field, the affair was settled without actual fighting; Maria
Theresa, fearing the chances of another struggle with Prussia, overruled
her son at the last moment, and by the treaty of Teschen agreed to be
content with the cession of the Quarter of the Inn (Innviertel) and some
other districts.

[Sidenote: Russia, Austria and the Ottoman Empire.]

Meanwhile the ambition of Catherine of Russia, and the war with Turkey by
which the empire of the tsars was advanced to the Black Sea and threatened
to establish itself south of the Danube, were productive of consequences of
enormous importance to Austria in the East. Russian control of the Danube
was a far more serious menace to Austria than the neighbourhood of the
decadent Ottoman power; and for a while the policy of Austria towards the
Porte underwent a change that foreshadowed her attitude towards the Eastern
Question in the 19th century. In spite of the reluctance of Maria Theresa,
Kaunitz, in July 1771, concluded a defensive alliance with the Porte. He
would have exchanged this for an active co-operation with Turkey, could
Frederick the Great have been persuaded to promise at least neutrality in
the event of a Russo-Austrian War. But Frederick was unwilling to break
with Russia, with whom he was negotiating the partition of Poland; Austria
in these circumstances dared not take the offensive; and Maria Theresa was
compelled to purchase the modification of the extreme claims of Russia in
Turkey by agreeing to, and sharing in, the spoliation of Poland. [Sidenote:
Partition of Poland.] Her own share of the spoils was the acquisition, by
the first treaty of partition (August 5, 1772), of Galicia and Lodomeria.
Turkey was left in the lurch; and Austrian troops even occupied portions of
Moldavia, in order to secure the communication between the new Polish
provinces and Transylvania. At Constantinople, too, Austria once more
supported Russian policy, and was rewarded, in 1777, by the acquisition of
Bukovina from Turkey. In Italy the influence of the House of Austria had
been strengthened by the marriage of the archduke Ferdinand with the
heiress of the d'Estes of Modena, and the establishment of the archduke
Leopold in the grand-duchy of Tuscany.

[Sidenote: Internal reforms under Maria Theresa.]

In internal affairs Maria Theresa may be regarded as the practical founder
of the unified Austrian state. The new system of centralization has already
been referred to. It only remains to add that, in carrying out this system,
Maria Theresa was too wise to fall into the errors afterwards made by her
son and successor. She was no doctrinaire, and consistently acted on the
principle once laid down by Machiavelli, that while changing the substance,
the prince should be careful to preserve the form of old institutions.
Alongside the new bureaucracy, the old estates survived in somnolent
inactivity, and even in Hungary, though the ancient constitution was left
untouched, the diet was only summoned four times during the reign, and
reforms were carried out, without protest, by royal ordinance. It was under
Maria Theresa, too, [v.03 p.0011] that the attempt was first made to make
German the official language of the whole monarchy; an attempt which was
partly successful even in Hungary, especially so far as the army was
concerned, though Latin remained the official tongue of the diet, the
county-assemblies and the courts.

The social, religious and educational reforms of Maria Theresa also mark
her reign as the true epoch of transition from medieval to modern
conditions in Austria. In religious matters the empress, though a devout
Catholic and herself devoted to the Holy See, was carried away by the
prevailing reaction, in which her ministers shared, against the pretensions
of the papacy. The anti-papal tendency, known as Febronianism (_q.v._), had
made immense headway, not only among the laity but among the clergy in the
Austrian dominions. By a new law, papal bulls could not be published
without the consent of the crown, and the direct intercourse of the bishops
with Rome was forbidden; the privileges of the religious orders were
curtailed; and the education of the clergy was brought under state control.
It was, however, only with reluctance that Maria Theresa agreed to carry
out the papal bull suppressing the Society of Jesus; and, while declaring
herself against persecution, she could never be persuaded to accept the
views of Kaunitz and Joseph in favour of toleration. Parallel with the
assertion of the rights of the state as against the church, was the
revolution effected in the educational system of the monarchy. This, too,
was taken from the control of the church; the universities were remodelled
and modernized by the introduction of new faculties, the study of
ecclesiastical law being transferred from that of theology to that of
jurisprudence, and the elaborate system of elementary and secondary
education was established, which survived with slight modification till
1869.

[Sidenote: Joseph II. and "Josephinism."]

The death of Maria Theresa in 1780 left Joseph II. free to attempt the
drastic revolution from above, which had been restrained by the wise
statesmanship of his mother. He was himself a strange incarnation at once
of doctrinaire liberalism and the old Habsburg autocracy. Of the essential
conditions of his empire he was constitutionally unable to form a
conception. He was a disciple, not of Machiavelli, but of Rousseau; and his
scattered dominions, divided by innumerable divergences of racial and class
prejudice, and encumbered with traditional institutions to which the people
clung with passionate conservatism, he regarded as so much vacant territory
on which to build up his ideal state. He was, in fact, a Revolutionist who
happened also to be an emperor. "Reason" and "enlightenment" were his
watchwords; opposition to his wise measures he regarded as obscurantist and
unreasonable, and unreason, if it proved stubborn, as a vice to be
corrected with whips. In this spirit he at once set to work to reconstruct
the state, on lines that strangely anticipated the principles of the
Constituent Assembly of 1789. He refused to be crowned or to take the oath
of the local constitutions, and divided the whole monarchy into thirteen
departments, to be governed under a uniform system. In ecclesiastical
matters his policy was also that of "reform from above," the complete
subordination of the clergy to the state, and the severance of all
effective ties with Rome. This treatment of the "Fakirs and Ulemas" (as he
called them in his letters), who formed the most powerful element in the
monarchy, would alone have ensured the failure of his plans, but failure
was made certain by the introduction of the conscription, which turned even
the peasants, whom he had done much to emancipate, against him. The
threatened revolt of Hungary, and the actual revolt of Tirol and of the
Netherlands (see BELGIUM: _History_) together with the disasters of the war
with Turkey, forced him, before he died, to the formal reversal of the
whole policy of reform.

In his foreign policy Joseph II. had been scarcely less unhappy. In 1784 he
had resumed his plan of acquiring Bavaria for Austria by negotiating with
the elector Charles Theodore its exchange for the Netherlands, which were
to be erected for his benefit into a "Kingdom of Burgundy." The elector was
not unwilling, but the scheme was wrecked by the opposition of the heir to
the Bavarian throne, the duke of Zweibrücken, in response to whose appeal
Frederick the Great formed, on the 23rd of July 1785, a confederation of
German princes (_Fürstenbund_) for the purpose of opposing the threatened
preponderance of Austria. Prussia was thus for the first time formally
recognized as the protector of the German states against Austrian ambition,
and had at the same time become the centre of an anti-Austrian alliance,
which embraced Sweden, Poland and the maritime powers. In these
circumstances the war with Turkey, on which Joseph embarked, in alliance
with Russia, in 1788, would hardly have been justified by the most
brilliant success. The first campaign, however, which he conducted in
person was a dismal failure; the Turks followed the Austrian army,
disorganized by disease, across the Danube, and though the transference of
the command to the veteran marshal Loudon somewhat retrieved the initial
disasters, his successes were more than counterbalanced by the alliance,
concluded on the 31st of January 1790, between Prussia and Turkey. Three
weeks later, on the 20th of February 1790, Joseph died broken-hearted.

[Sidenote: Leopold II.]

The situation needed all the statesmanship of the new ruler, Leopold II.
This was less obvious in his domestic than in his foreign policy, though
perhaps equally present. As grand-duke of Tuscany Leopold had won the
reputation of an enlightened and liberal ruler; but meanwhile "Josephinism"
had not been justified by its results, and the progress of the Revolution
in France was beginning to scare even enlightened princes into reaction.
Leopold, then, reverted to the traditional Habsburg methods; the old
supremacy of the Church, regarded as the one effective bond of empire, was
restored; and the _Einheitsstaat_ was once more resolved into its elements,
with the old machinery of diets and estates, and the old abuses. It was the
beginning of that policy of "stability" associated later with Metternich,
which was to last till the cataclysm of 1848. For the time, the policy was
justified by its results. The spirit of revolutionary France had not yet
touched the heart of the Habsburg empire, and national rivalries were
expressed, not so much in expansive ambitions, as in a somnolent clinging
to traditional privileges. Leopold, therefore, who made his début on the
European stage as the executor of the ban of the Empire against the
insurgent Liégeois, was free to pose as the champion of order against the
Revolution, without needing to fear the resentment of his subjects. He
played this role with consummate skill in the negotiations that led up to
the treaty of Reichenbach (August 15, 1790), which ended the quarrel with
Prussia and paved the way to the armistice of Giurgevo with Turkey
(September 10). Leopold was now free to deal with the Low Countries, which
were reduced to order before the end of the year. On the 4th of August
1791, was signed at Sistova the definitive peace with Turkey, which
practically established the _status quo_.

[Sidenote: Austria and the French Revolution.]

On the 6th of October 1700, Leopold had been crowned Roman emperor at
Frankfort, and it was as emperor, not as Habsburg, that he first found
himself in direct antagonism to the France of the Revolution. The fact that
Leopold's sister, Marie Antoinette, was the wife of Louis XVI. had done
little to cement the Franco-Austrian alliance, which since 1763 had been
practically non-existent; nor was it now the mainspring of his attitude
towards revolutionary France. But by the decree of the 4th of August, which
in the general abolition of feudal rights involved the possessions of many
German princes _enclavés_ in Alsace and Lorraine, the Constituent Assembly
had made the first move in the war against the established European system.
Leopold protested as sovereign of Germany; and the protest was soon
enlarged into one made in the name of Europe. The circular letter of Count
Kaunitz, dated the 6th of July 1791, calling on the sovereigns to unite
against the Revolution, was at once the beginning of the Concert of Europe,
and in a sense the last manifesto of the Holy Roman Empire as "the centre
of political unity." But the common policy proclaimed in the famous
declaration of Pillnitz (August 27), was soon wrecked upon the particular
interests of the powers. Both Austria and Prussia [v.03 p.0012] were much
occupied with the Polish question, and to have plunged into a crusade
against France would have been to have left Poland, where the new
constitution had been proclaimed on the 3rd of May, to the mercy of Russia.
Towards the further development of events in France, therefore, Leopold
assumed at first a studiously moderate attitude; but his refusal to respond
to the demand of the French government for the dispersal of the corps of
_émigrés_ assembled under the protection of the German princes on the
frontier of France, and the insistence on the rights of princes
dispossessed in Alsace and Lorraine, precipitated the crisis. On the 25th
of January 1792 the French Assembly adopted the decree declaring that, in
the event of no satisfactory reply having been received from the emperor by
the 1st of March, war should be declared. On the 7th of February Austria
and Prussia signed at Berlin an offensive and defensive treaty of alliance.
Thus was ushered in the series of stupendous events which were to change
the face of Europe and profoundly to affect the destinies of Austria.
Leopold himself did not live to see the beginning of the struggle; he died
on the 1st of March 1792, the day fixed by the Legislative Assembly as that
on which the question of peace or war was to be decided.

[Sidenote: Effects of the Revolutionary Wars.]

The events of the period that followed, in which Austria necessarily played
a conspicuous part, are dealt with elsewhere (see EUROPE, FRENCH
REVOLUTIONARY WARS, NAPOLEON, NAPOLEONIC CAMPAIGNS). Here it will only be
necessary to mention those which form permanent landmarks in the
progressive conformation of the Austrian monarchy. Such was the second
partition of Poland (January 23, 1793), which eliminated the "buffer state"
on which Austrian statesmanship had hitherto laid such importance, and
brought the Austrian and Russian frontiers into contact. Such, too, was the
treaty of Campo Formio (October 17, 1797) which ended the first
revolutionary war. By this treaty the loss of the Belgian provinces was
confirmed, and though Austria gained Venice, the establishment of French
preponderance in the rest of Italy made a breach in the tradition of
Habsburg supremacy in the peninsula, which was to have its full effect only
in the struggles of the next century. The rise of Napoleon, and his
masterful interference in Germany, produced a complete and permanent
revolution in the relations of Austria to the German states. The campaigns
which issued in the treaty of Lunéville (February 9, 1801) practically
sealed the fate of the old Empire. Even were the venerable name to survive,
it was felt that it would pass, by the election of the princes now
tributary to France, from the house of Habsburg to that of Bonaparte.
[Sidenote: The "Empire of Austria."] Francis II. determined to forestall
the possible indignity of the subordination of his family to an upstart
dynasty. On the 14th of May 1804, Napoleon was proclaimed emperor of the
French; on the 11th of August Francis II. assumed the style of Francis I.,
hereditary emperor of Austria. [Sidenote: End of the Holy Roman Empire.]
Two years later, when the defeat of Austerlitz had led to the treaty of
Pressburg (January 1st, 1806) by which Austria lost Venice and Tirol, and
Napoleon's Confederation of the Rhine had broken the unity of Germany,
Francis formally abdicated the title and functions of Holy Roman emperor
(August 6, 1806).

Austria had to undergo further losses and humiliations, notably by the
treaty of Vienna (1809), before the outcome of Napoleon's Russian campaign
in 1812 gave her the opportunity for recuperation and revenge. The skilful
diplomacy of Metternich, who was now at the head of the Austrian
government, enabled Austria to take full advantage of the situation created
by the disaster to Napoleon's arms. His object was to recover Austria's
lost possessions and if possible to add to them, a policy which did not
necessarily involve the complete overthrow of the French emperor. Austria,
therefore, refused to join the alliance between Russia and Prussia signed
on the 17th of March 1813, but pressed on her armaments so as to be ready
in any event. Her opportunity came after the defeats of the Allies at
Lützen and Bautzen and the conclusion of an armistice at Pleswitz. Between
200,000 and 300,000 Austrian troops were massed in Bohemia; and Austria
took up the rôle of mediator, prepared to throw the weight of her support
into the scale of whichever side should prove most amenable to her claims.
The news of the battle of Vittoria, following on the reluctance of Napoleon
to listen to demands involving the overthrow of the whole of his political
system in Central Europe, decided Austria in favour of the Allies. By this
fateful decision Napoleon's fall was assured. By the treaty of Trachenberg
(July 12, 1813) the Grand Alliance was completed; on the 16th, 17th and
18th of October the battle of Leipzig was fought; and the victorious
advance into France was begun, which issued, on the 11th of April 1814, in
Napoleon's abdication. (See NAPOLEON, NAPOLEONIC CAMPAIGNS, EUROPE.)

[Sidenote: Congress of Vienna.]

It was a recognition of the decisive part played by Austria in these great
events that Vienna was chosen as the scene of the great international
congress summoned (September 1814) for the purpose of re-establishing the
balance of power in Europe, which Napoleon's conquests had upset. An
account of the congress is given elsewhere (see VIENNA, CONGRESS OF). The
result for Austria was a triumphant vindication of Metternich's diplomacy.
He had, it is true, been unable to prevent the retention of the grand-duchy
of Warsaw by Alexander of Russia; but with the aid of Great Britain and
France (secret treaty of January 3, 1815) he had frustrated the efforts of
Prussia to absorb the whole of Saxony, Bavaria was forced to disgorge the
territories gained for her by Napoleon at Austria's expense, Illyria and
Dalmatia were regained, and Lombardy was added to Venetia to constitute a
kingdom under the Habsburg crown; while in the whole Italian peninsula
French was replaced by Austrian influence. In Germany the settlement was
even more fateful for Austria's future. The Holy Empire, in spite of the
protests of the Holy See, was not restored, Austria preferring the loose
confederation of sovereign states (_Staatenbund_) actually constituted
under her presidency. Such a body, Metternich held, "powerful for defence,
powerless for offence," would form a guarantee of the peace of central
Europe--and of the preponderance of Austria; and in its councils Austrian
diplomacy, backed by the weight of the Habsburg power beyond the borders of
Germany, would exercise a greater influence than any possible prestige
derived from a venerable title that had become a by-word for the union of
unlimited pretensions with practical impotence. Moreover, to the refusal to
revive the Empire--which shattered so many patriotic hopes in
Germany--Austria added another decision yet more fateful. By relinquishing
her claim to the Belgian provinces and other outlying territories in
western Germany, and by acquiescing in the establishment of Prussia in the
Rhine provinces, she abdicated to Prussia her position as the bulwark of
Germany against France, and hastened the process of her own gravitation
towards the Slavonic East to which the final impetus was given in 1866.

[Sidenote: Internal affairs of Austria under Francis II. and Metternich.]

In order to understand the foreign policy of Austria, inseparably
associated with the name of Metternich, during the period from the close of
the congress of Vienna to the outbreak of the revolutions of 1848, it is
necessary to know something of the internal conditions of the monarchy
before and during this time. In 1792 Leopold II. had been succeeded by his
son Francis II. His popular designation of "our good Kaiser Franz" this
monarch owed to a certain simplicity of address and _bonhomie_ which
pleased the Viennese, certainly not to his serious qualities as a ruler. He
shared to the full the autocratic temper of the Habsburgs, their
narrow-mindedness and their religious and intellectual obscurantism; and
the qualities which would have made him a kindly, if somewhat tyrannical,
father of a family, and an excellent head clerk, were hardly those required
by the conditions of the Austrian monarchy during a singularly critical
period of its history.

The personal character of the emperor, moreover, gained a special
importance owing to the modifications that were made in the administrative
system of the empire. This had been originally organized in a series of
departments: Aulic chanceries for Austria, for Hungary and Transylvania, a
general Aulic chamber for finance, domains, mines, trade, post, &c., an
Aulic council [v.03 p.0013] of war, a general directory of accounts, and a
chancery of the household, court and state. The heads of all these
departments had the rank of secretaries of state and met in council under
the royal presidency. In course of time, however, this body became too
unwieldy for an effective cabinet, and Maria Theresa established the
council of state. During the early years of the reign of Francis, the
emperor kept himself in touch with the various departments by means of a
cabinet minister; but he had a passion for detail, and after 1805 he
himself undertook the function of keeping the administration together. At
the same time he had no personal contact with ministers, who might
communicate with him only in writing, and for months together never met for
the discussion of business. The council of state was, moreover, itself soon
enlarged and subdivided; and in course of time the emperor alone
represented any synthesis of the various departments of the administration.
The jurisdiction of the heads of departments, moreover, was strictly
defined, and all that lay outside this was reserved for the imperial
decision. Whatever was covered by established precedent could be settled by
the department at once; but matters falling outside such precedent, however
insignificant, had to be referred to the throne.[2] A system so inelastic,
and so deadening to all initiative, could have but one result. Gradually
the officials, high and low, subjected to an elaborate system of checks,
refused to take any responsibility whatever; and the minutest
administrative questions were handed up, through all the stages of the
bureaucratic hierarchy, to be shelved and forgotten in the imperial
cabinet. For Francis could not possibly himself deal with all the questions
of detail arising in his vast empire, even had he desired to do so. In
fact, his attitude towards all troublesome problems was summed up in his
favourite phrase, "Let us sleep upon it": questions unanswered would answer
themselves.

The result was the gradual atrophy of the whole administrative machine. The
Austrian government was not consciously tyrannical, even in Italy; and
Francis himself, though determined to be absolute, intended also to be
paternal. Nor would the cruelties inflicted on the bolder spirits who dared
to preach reform, which made the Austrian government a by-word among the
nations, alone have excited the passionate spirit of revolt which carried
all before it in 1848. The cause of this is to be sought rather in the
daily friction of a system which had ceased to be efficient and only
succeeded in irritating the public opinion it was powerless to curb.

Metternich himself was fully conscious of the evil. He recognized that the
fault of the government lay in the fact that it did not govern, and he
deplored that his own function, in a decadent age, was but "to prop up
mouldering institutions." He was not constitutionally averse from change;
and he was too clear-sighted not to see that, sooner or later, change was
inevitable. But his interest was in the fascinating game of diplomacy; he
was ambitious of playing the leading part on the great stage of
international politics; and he was too consummate a courtier to risk the
loss of the imperial favour by any insistence on unpalatable reforms,
which, after all, would perhaps only reveal the necessity for the complete
revolution which he feared.

The alternative was to use the whole force of the government to keep things
as they were. The disintegrating force of the ever-simmering racial
rivalries could be kept in check by the army; Hungarian regiments
garrisoned Italy, Italian regiments guarded Galicia, Poles occupied
Austria, and Austrians Hungary. The peril from the infiltration of
"revolutionary" ideas from without was met by the erection round the
Austrian dominions of a Chinese wall of tariffs and censors, which had,
however, no more success than is usual with such expedients.[3] The peril
from the independent growth of Liberalism within was guarded against by a
rigid supervision of the press and the re-establishment of clerical control
over education. Music alone flourished, free from government interference;
but, curiously enough, the movements, in Bohemia, Croatia and elsewhere,
for the revival of the national literatures and languages--which were to
issue in the most difficult problem facing the Austrian government at the
opening of the 20th century--were encouraged in exalted circles, as tending
to divert attention from political to purely scientific interests.
Meanwhile the old system of provincial diets and estates was continued or
revived (in 1816 in Tirol and Vorarlberg, 1817 in Galicia, 1818 in
Carniola, 1828 in the circle of Salzburg), but they were in no sense
representative, clergy and nobles alone being eligible, with a few
delegates from the towns, and they had practically no functions beyond
registering the imperial decrees, relative to recruiting or taxation, and
dealing with matters of local police.[4] Even the ancient right of petition
was seldom exercised, and then only to meet with the imperial disfavour.
And this stagnation of the administration was accompanied, as might have
been expected, by economic stagnation. Agriculture languished, hampered, as
in France before the Revolution, by the feudal privileges of a noble caste
which no longer gave any equivalent service to the state; trade was
strangled by the system of high tariffs at the frontier and internal
_octrois_; and finally public credit was shaken to its foundations by
lavish issues of paper money and the neglect to publish the budget.

[Sidenote: Metternich's policy of stability.]

The maintenance within the empire of a system so artificial and so unsound,
involved in foreign affairs the policy of preventing the success of any
movements by which it might be threatened. The triumph of Liberal
principles or of national aspirations in Germany, or elsewhere in Europe,
might easily, as the events of 1848 proved, shatter the whole rotten
structure of the Habsburg monarchy, which survived only owing to the apathy
of the populations it oppressed. This, then, is the explanation of the
system of "stability" which Metternich succeeded in imposing for thirty
years upon Europe. If he persuaded Frederick William III. that the grant of
a popular constitution would be fatal to the Prussian monarchy, this was
through no love of Prussia; the Carlsbad Decrees and the Vienna Final Act
were designed to keep Germany quiet, lest the sleep of Austria should be
disturbed; the lofty claims of the Troppau Protocol were but to cover an
Austrian aggression directed to purely Austrian ends: and in the Eastern
Question, the moral support given to the "legitimate" authority of the
sultan over the "rebel" Greeks was dictated solely by the interest of
Austria in maintaining the integrity of Turkey. (See EUROPE: _History_;
GERMANY: _History_; ALEXANDER I. of Russia; METTERNICH, &c.)

Judged by the standard of its own aims Metternich's diplomacy was, on the
whole, completely successful. For fifteen years after the congress of
Vienna, in spite of frequent alarms, the peace of Europe was not seriously
disturbed; and even in 1830, the revolution at Paris found no echo in the
great body of the Austrian dominions. The isolated revolts in Italy were
easily suppressed; and the insurrection of Poland, though it provoked the
lively sympathy of the Magyars and Czechs, led to no actual movement in the
Habsburg states. For a moment, indeed, Metternich had meditated taking
advantage of the popular feeling to throw the weight of Austria into the
scale in favour of the Poles, and thus, by re-establishing a Polish kingdom
under Austrian influence, to restore the barrier between the two empires
which the partition of Poland had destroyed. But cautious counsels
prevailed, and by the victory of the Russian arms the _status quo_ was
restored (see POLAND).

[Sidenote: Ferdinand I. 1835-1848.]

The years that followed were not wanting in signs of the coming storm. On
the 2nd of March 1835 Francis I. died, and was succeeded by his son
Ferdinand I. The new emperor was personally amiable, but so enfeebled by
epilepsy as to be incapable of ruling; a veiled regency had to be
constituted to carry on the government, and the vices of the administration
were further accentuated by weakness and divided counsels at the centre.
Under these circumstances [v.03 p.0014] popular discontent made rapid
headway. The earliest symptoms of political agitation were in Hungary,
where the diet began to show signs of vigorous life, and the growing Slav
separatist movements, especially in the south of the kingdom, were rousing
the old spirit of Magyar ascendancy (see HUNGARY: _History_). For
everywhere the Slav populations were growing restive under the
German-Magyar domination. In Bohemia the Czech literary movement had
developed into an organized resistance to the established order, which was
attacked under the disguise of a criticism of the English administration in
Ireland. "Repeal" became the watchword of Bohemian, as of Irish,
nationalists (see BOHEMIA). Among the southern Slavs the "Illyrian"
movement, voiced from 1836 onward in the _Illyrian National Gazette_ of
Ljudevit Gaj, was directed in the first instance to a somewhat shadowy
Pan-Slav union, which, on the interference of the Austrian government in
1844, was exchanged for the more definite object of a revival of "the
Triune Kingdom" (Croatia, Slavonia, Dalmatia) independent of the Hungarian
crown (see CROATIA, &c.). In the German provinces also, in spite of
Metternich's censors and police, the national movements in Germany had
gained an entrance, and, as the revolution of 1848 in Vienna was to show,
the most advanced revolutionary views were making headway.

[Sidenote: Galician Rising, 1846.]

The most important of all the symptoms of the approaching cataclysm was,
however, the growing unrest among the peasants. As had been proved in
France in 1789, and was again to be shown in Russia in 1906, the success of
any political revolution depended ultimately upon the attitude of the
peasant class. In this lies the main significance of the rising in Galicia
in 1846. This was in its origin a Polish nationalist movement, hatched in
the little independent republic of Cracow. As such it had little
importance; though, owing to the incompetence of the Austrian commander,
the Poles gained some initial successes. More fateful was the attitude of
the Orthodox Ruthenian peasantry, who were divided from their Catholic
Polish over-lords by centuries of religious and feudal oppression. The
Poles had sought, by lavish promises, to draw them into their ranks; their
reply was to rise in support of the Austrian government. In the fight at
Gdow (February 26th), where Benedek laid the foundations of the military
reputation that was to end so tragically at Königgrätz, flail and scythe
wrought more havoc in the rebel ranks than the Austrian musketry. Since, in
spite of this object-lesson, the Polish nobles still continued their
offers, the peasants consulted the local Austrian authorities as to what
course they should take; and the local authorities, unaccustomed to
arriving at any decision without consulting Vienna, practically gave them
_carte blanche_ to do as they liked. A hideous _jacquerie_ followed for
three or four days; during which cartloads of dead were carried into
Tarnow, where the peasants received a reward for every "rebel" brought in.

This affair was not only a scandal for which the Austrian government,
through its agents, was responsible; but it placed the authorities at
Vienna in a serious dilemma. For the Ruthenians, elated by their victory,
refused to return to work, and demanded the abolition of all feudal
obligations as the reward of their loyalty. To refuse this claim would have
meant the indefinite prolongation of the crisis; to concede it would have
been to invite the peasantry of the whole empire to put forth similar
demands on pain of a general rising. On the 13th of April 1846 an imperial
decree abolished some of the more burdensome feudal obligations; but this
concession was greeted with so fierce an outcry, as an authoritative
endorsement of the atrocities, that it was again revoked, and Count Franz
von Stadion was sent to restore order in Galicia. The result was, that the
peasants saw that though their wrongs were admitted, their sole hope of
redress lay in a change of government, and added the dead weight of their
resentment to the forces making for revolution. It was the union of the
agrarian with the nationalist movements that made the downfall of the
Austrian system inevitable.

[Sidenote: Revolutions of 1848.]

The material for the conflagration in Austria was thus all prepared when in
February 1848 the fall of Louis Philippe fanned into a blaze the
smouldering fires of revolution throughout Europe. On the 3rd of March,
Kossuth, in the diet at Pressburg, delivered the famous speech which was
the declaration of war of Hungarian Liberalism against the Austrian system.
"From the charnel-house of the Vienna cabinet," he exclaimed, "a
pestilential air breathes on us, which dulls our nerves and paralyses the
flight of our spirit." Hungary liberated was to become the centre of
freedom for all the races under the Austrian crown, and the outcome was to
be a new "fraternization of the Austrian peoples." In the enthusiasm of the
moment the crucial question of the position to be occupied by the
conflicting nationalities in this "fraternal union" was overlooked.
Germanism had so far served as the basis of the Austrian system, not as a
national ideal, but because "it formed a sort of unnational mediating, and
common element among the contradictory and clamorous racial tendencies."
But with the growth of the idea of German unity, Germanism had established
a new ideal, of which the centre lay beyond the boundaries of the Austrian
monarchy, and which was bound to be antagonistic to the aspirations of
other races. The new doctrine of the fraternization of the Austrian races
would inevitably soon come into conflict with the traditional German
ascendancy strengthened by the new sentiment of a united Germany. It was on
this rock that, both in Austria and in Germany, the revolution suffered
shipwreck.

Meanwhile events progressed rapidly. On the 11th of March a meeting of
"young Czechs" at Prague drew up a petition embodying nationalist and
liberal demands; and on the same day the diet of Lower Austria petitioned
the crown to summon a meeting of the delegates of the diets to set the
Austrian finances in order. To this last proposal the government, next day,
gave its consent. But in the actual temper of the Viennese the slightest
concession was dangerous. The hall of the diet was invaded by a mob of
students and workmen, Kossuth's speech was read and its proposals adopted
as the popular programme, and the members of the diet were forced to lead a
tumultuous procession to the Hofburg, to force the assent of the government
to a petition based on the catch-words of the Revolution. [Sidenote: Fall
of Metternich, March 13, 1848.] The authorities, taken by surprise, were
forced to temporize and agreed to lay the petition before the emperor.
Meanwhile round the hall of the diet a riot had broken out; the soldiers
intervened and blood was shed. The middle classes now joined the rebels;
and the riots had become a revolution. Threatened by the violence of the
mob, Metternich, on the evening of the 13th of March, escaped from the
Hofburg and passed into exile in England.

The fall of Metternich was the signal for the outburst of the storm, not in
Austria only, but throughout central Europe. In Hungary, on the 31st of
March, the government was forced to consent to a new constitution which
virtually erected Hungary into an independent state. On the 8th of April a
separate constitution was promised to Bohemia; and if the petition of the
Croats for a similar concession was rejected, this was due to the armed mob
of Vienna, which was in close alliance with Kossuth and the Magyars. The
impotence of the Austrian government in this crisis was due to the
necessity of keeping the bulk of the Austrian forces in Italy, where the
news of Metternich's fall had also led to a concerted rising against the
Habsburg rule (see ITALY). Upon the fortunes of war in the peninsula
depended the ultimate issue of the revolutions so far as Austria was
concerned.

The army and the prestige of the imperial tradition were, in fact, the two
sheet-anchors that enabled the Habsburg monarchy to weather the storm. For
the time the latter was the only one available; but it proved invaluable,
especially in Germany, in preventing any settlement, until Radetzky's
victory of Novara had set free the army, and thus once more enabled Austria
to back her policy by force. The Austrian government, in no position to
refuse, had consented to send delegates from its German provinces to the
parliament of united Germany, which met at Frankfort on the 18th of May
1848. The question at [v.03 p.0015] once arose of the place of the Austrian
monarchy in united Germany. Were only its German provinces to be included?
Or was it to be incorporated whole? As to the first, the Austrian
government would not listen to the suggestion of a settlement which would
have split the monarchy in half and subjected it to a double allegiance. As
to the second, German patriots could not stomach the inclusion in Germany
of a vast non-German population. The dilemma was from the first so obvious
that the parliament would have done well to have recognized at once that
the only possible solution was that arrived at, after the withdrawal of the
Austrian delegates, by the exclusion of Austria altogether and the offer of
the crown of Germany to Frederick William of Prussia. But the shadow of the
Holy Empire, immemorially associated with the house of Habsburg, still
darkened the counsels of German statesmen. The Austrian archduke John had
been appointed regent, pending the election of an emperor; and the
political leaders could neither break loose from the tradition of Austrian
hegemony, nor reconcile themselves with the idea of a mutilated Germany,
till it was too late, and Austria was once more in a position to
re-establish the system devised by her diplomacy at the congress of Vienna.
(See GERMANY: _History._)

This fatal procrastination was perhaps not without excuse, in view of the
critical situation of the Austrian monarchy during 1848. For months after
the fall of Metternich Austria was practically without a central
government. Vienna itself, where on the 14th of March the establishment of
a National Guard was authorized by the emperor, was ruled by a committee of
students and citizens, who arrogated to themselves a voice in imperial
affairs, and imposed their will on the distracted ministry. On the 15th of
March the government proposed to summon a central committee of local diets;
but this was far from satisfying public opinion, and on the 25th of April a
constitution was proclaimed, including the whole monarchy with the
exception of Hungary and Lombardo-Venetia. This was, however, met by
vigorous protests from Czechs and Poles, while its provisions for a partly
nominated senate, and the indirect election of deputies, excited the wrath
of radical Vienna. Committees of students and national guards were formed;
on the 13th of May a Central Committee was established; and on the 15th a
fresh insurrection broke out, as a result of which the government once more
yielded, recognizing the Central Committee, admitting the right of the
National Guard to take an active part in politics, and promising the
convocation of a National Convention on the basis of a single chamber
elected by universal suffrage. On the 17th the emperor left Vienna for
Innsbruck "for the benefit of his health," and thence, on the 20th, issued
a proclamation in which he cast himself on the loyalty of his faithful
provinces, and, while confirming the concessions of March, ignored those of
the 15th of May. The flight of the emperor had led to a revulsion of
feeling in Vienna; but the issue of the proclamation and the attempt of the
government to disperse the students by closing the university, led to a
fresh outbreak on the 26th. Once more the ministry conceded all the demands
of the insurgents, and even went so far as to hand over the public treasury
and the responsibility of keeping order to a newly constituted Committee of
Public Safety.

[Sidenote: National movements.]

The tide was now, however, on the turn. The Jacobinism of the Vienna
democracy was not really representative of any widespread opinion even in
the German parts of Austria, while its loud-voiced Germanism excited the
lively opposition of the other races. Each of these had taken advantage of
the March troubles to press its claims, and everywhere the government had
shown the same yielding spirit. In Bohemia, where the attempt to hold
elections for the Frankfort parliament had broken down on the opposition of
the Czechs and the conservative German aristocracy, a separate constitution
had been proclaimed on the 8th of April; on March the 23rd the election by
the diet of Agram of Baron Joseph Jellachich as ban of Croatia was
confirmed, as a concession to the agitation among the southern Slavs; on
the 18th of March Count Stadion had proclaimed a new constitution for
Galicia. Even where, as in the case of the Serbs and Rumans, the government
had given no formal sanction to the national claims, the emperor was
regarded as the ultimate guarantee of their success; and deputations from
the various provinces poured into Innsbruck protesting their loyalty.

To say that the government deliberately adopted the Machiavellian policy of
mastering the revolution by setting race against race would be to pay too
high a compliment to its capacity. The policy was forced upon it; and was
only pursued consciously when it became obvious. Count Stadion began it in
Galicia, where, before bombarding insurgent Cracow into submission (April
26), he had won over the Ruthenian peasants by the abolition of feudal dues
and by forwarding a petition to the emperor for the official recognition of
their language alongside Polish. But the great object lesson was furnished
by the events in Prague, where the quarrel between Czechs and Germans,
radicals and conservatives, issued on the 12th of June in a rising of the
Czech students and populace. The suppression of this rising, and with it of
the revolution in Bohemia, on the 16th of June, by Prince Windischgrätz,
was not only the first victory of the army, but was the signal for the
outbreak of a universal race war, in which the idea of constitutional
liberty was sacrificed to the bitter spirit of national rivalry. The
parliament at Frankfort hailed Windischgrätz as a national hero, and
offered to send troops to his aid; the German revolutionists in Vienna
welcomed every success of Radetzky's arms in Italy as a victory for
Germanism. The natural result was to drive the Slav nationalities to the
side of the imperial government, since, whether at Vienna or at Budapest,
the radicals were their worst enemies.

The 16th of June had been fatal to the idea of an independent Bohemia,
fatal also to Pan-Slav dreams. To the Czechs the most immediate peril now
seemed that from the German parliament, and in the interests of their
nationality they were willing to join the Austrian government in the
struggle against German liberalism. The Bohemian diet, summoned for the
19th, never met. Writs were issued in Bohemia for the election to the
Austrian Reichsrath; and when, on the 10th of July, this assembled, the
Slav deputies were found to be in a majority. This fact, which was to lead
to violent trouble later, was at first subordinate to other issues, of
which the most important was the question of the emancipation of the
peasants. After long debates the law abolishing feudal services--the sole
permanent outcome of the revolution--was carried on the 31st of August, and
on the 7th of September received the imperial consent. The peasants thus
received all that they desired, and their vast weight was henceforth thrown
into the scale of the government against the revolution.

[Sidenote: Jellachich and "Illyrism."]

Meanwhile the alliance between the Slav nationalities and the conservative
elements within the empire had found a powerful representative in
Jellachich, the ban of Croatia. At first, indeed, his activity had been
looked at askance at Innsbruck, as but another force making for
disintegration. He had apparently identified himself with the "Illyrian"
party, had broken off all communications with the Hungarian government,
and, in spite of an imperial edict issued in response to the urgency of
Batthyáni, had summoned a diet to Agram, which on the 9th of June decreed
the separation of the "Triune Kingdom" from Hungary. The imperial
government, which still hoped for Magyar aid against the Viennese
revolutionists, repudiated the action of the ban, accused him of
disobedience and treason, and deprived him of his military rank. But his
true motives were soon apparent; his object was to play off the nationalism
of the "Illyrians" against the radicalism of Magyars and Germans, and thus
to preserve his province for the monarchy; and the Hungarian radicals
played into his hands. The fate of the Habsburg empire depended upon the
issue of the campaign in Italy, which would have been lost by the
withdrawal of the Magyar and Croatian regiments; and the Hungarian
government chose this critical moment to tamper with the relations of the
army to the monarchy. In May a National Guard had been established; [v.03
p.0016] and the soldiers of the line were invited to join this, with the
promise of higher pay; on the 1st of June the garrison of Pest took the
oath to the Constitution. On the 10th Jellachich issued a proclamation to
the Croatian regiments in Italy, bidding them remain and fight for the
emperor and the common Fatherland. His loyalty to the tradition of the
imperial army was thus announced, and the alliance was cemented between the
army and the southern Slavs.

Jellachich, who had gone to Innsbruck to lay the Slav view before the
emperor, was allowed to return to Agram, though not as yet formally
reinstated. Here the diet passed a resolution denouncing the dual system
and demanding the restoration of the union of the empire. Thus was
proclaimed the identity of the Slav and the conservative points of view;
the radical "Illyrian" assembly had done its work, and on the 9th of July
Jellachich, while declaring it "permanent," prorogued it indefinitely "with
a paternal greeting," on the ground that the safety of the Fatherland
depended now "more upon physical than upon moral force." The diet thus
prorogued never met again. Absolute master of the forces of the banat,
Jellachich now waited until the intractable politicians of Pest should give
him the occasion and the excuse for setting the imperial army in motion
against them.

[Sidenote: Hungary.]

The occasion was not to be long postponed. Every day the rift between the
dominant radical element in the Hungarian parliament and imperial court was
widened. Kossuth and his followers were evidently aiming at the complete
separation of Hungary from Austria; they were in sympathy, if not in
alliance, with the German radicals in Vienna and Frankfort; they were less
than half-hearted in their support of the imperial arms in Italy. The
imperial government, pressed by the Magyar nationalists to renounce
Jellachich and all his works, equivocated and procrastinated, while within
its councils the idea of a centralized state, to replace the loose
federalism of the old empire, slowly took shape under the pressure of the
military party. It was encouraged by the news from Italy, where, on the
25th of July, Radetzky had won the battle of Custozza, and on the 6th of
August the Austrian standard once more floated over the towers of Milan. At
Custozza Magyar hussars, Croats from the Military Frontier, and Tirolese
sharpshooters had fought side by side. The possibility was obvious of
combating the radical and nationalist revolution by means of the army, with
its spirit of comradeship in arms and its imperialist tradition.

So early as the beginning of July, Austrian officers, with the permission
of the minister of war, had joined the Serb insurgents who, under
Stratemirovi['c], were defying the Magyar power in the banat. By the end of
August the breach between the Austrian and Hungarian governments was open
and complete; on the 4th of September Jellachich was reinstated in all his
honours, and on the 11th he crossed the Drave to the invasion of Hungary.
The die was thus cast; and, though efforts continued to be made to arrange
matters, the time for moderate counsels was passed. The conservative
leaders of the Hungarian nationalists, Eötvös and Deák, retired from public
life; and, though Batthyáni consented to remain in office, the slender hope
that this gave of peace was ruined by the flight of the palatine (September
24) and the murder of Count Lamberg, the newly appointed commissioner and
commander-in-chief in Hungary, by the mob at Pest (September 27). The
appeal was now to arms; and the fortunes of the Habsburg monarchy were
bound up with the fate of the war in Hungary (see HUNGARY: _History_).

Meanwhile, renewed trouble had broken out in Vienna, where the radical
populace was in conflict alike with the government and with the Slav
majority of the Reichsrath. The German democrats appealed for aid to the
Hungarian government; but the Magyar passion for constitutional legality
led to delay, and before the Hungarian advance could be made effective, it
was too late. On the 7th of October the emperor Ferdinand had fled from
Schönbrunn to Olmütz, a Slav district, whence he issued a proclamation
inviting whoever loved "Austria and freedom" to rally round the throne. On
the 11th Windischgrätz proclaimed his intention of marching against
rebellious Vienna, and on the 16th an imperial rescript appointed him a
field-marshal and commander-in-chief of all the Austrian armies except that
of Italy. Meanwhile, of the Reichsrath, the members of the Right and the
Slav majority had left Vienna and announced a meeting of the diet at Brünn
for the 20th of October; all that remained in the capital was a rump of
German radicals, impotent in the hands of the proletariat and the students.
The defence of the city was hastily organized under Bern, an ex-officer of
Napoleon; but in the absence of help from Hungary it was futile. On the
28th of October Windischgrätz began his attack; on the 1st of November he
was master of the city.

The fall of revolutionary Vienna practically involved that of the
revolution in Frankfort and in Pest. From Italy the congratulations of
Radetzky's victorious army came to Windischgrätz, from Russia the even more
significant commendations of the emperor Nicholas. The moral of the victory
was painted for all the world by the military execution of Robert Blum,
whose person, as a deputy of the German parliament, should have been
sacrosanct. The time had, indeed, not yet come to attempt any conspicuous
breach with the constitutional principle; but the new ministry was such as
the imperial sentiment would approve, inimical to the German ideals of
Frankfort, devoted to the traditions of the Habsburg monarchy. At its head
was Prince Felix Schwarzenberg (_q.v._), the "army-diplomat," a statesman
at once strong and unscrupulous. On the 27th of November a proclamation
announced that the continuation of Austria as a united state was necessary
both for Germany and for Europe. [Sidenote: Accession of Francis Joseph,
1848] On the 2nd of December the emperor Ferdinand, bound by too many
personal obligations to the revolutionary parties to serve as a useful
instrument for the new policy, abdicated, and his nephew Francis Joseph
ascended the throne. The proclamation of the new emperor was a gage of
defiance thrown down to Magyars and German unionists alike: "Firmly
determined to preserve undimmed the lustre of our crown," it ran, "but
prepared to share our rights with the representatives of our peoples, we
trust that with God's aid and in common with our peoples we shall succeed
in uniting all the countries and races of the monarchy in one great body
politic."

While the Reichsrath, transferred to Kremsier, was discussing "fundamental
rights" and the difficult question of how to reconcile the theoretical
unity with the actual dualism of the empire, the knot was being cut by the
sword on the plains of Hungary. The Hungarian retreat after the bloody
battle of Kapolna (February 26-27, 1849) was followed by the dissolution of
the Kremsier assembly, and a proclamation in which the emperor announced
his intention of granting a constitution to the whole monarchy "one and
indivisible." On the 4th of March the constitution was published; but it
proved all but as distasteful to Czechs and Croats as to the Magyars, and
the speedy successes of the Hungarian arms made it, for the while, a dead
letter. It needed the intervention of the emperor Nicholas, in the loftiest
spirit of the Holy Alliance, before even an experimental unity of the
Habsburg dominions could be established (see HUNGARY: _History_).

The capitulation of Világos, which ended the Hungarian insurrection, gave
Schwarzenberg a free hand for completing the work of restoring the _status
quo ante_ and the influence of Austria in Germany. The account of the
process by which this was accomplished belongs to the history of Germany
(_q.v._). Here it will suffice to say that the terms of the Convention of
Olmütz (September 29, 1850) seemed at the time a complete triumph for
Austria over Prussia. As a matter of fact, however, the convention was, in
the words of Count Beust, "not a Prussian humiliation, but an Austrian
weakness." It was in the power of Austria to crush Prussia and to put an
end to the dual influence in the Confederation which experience had proved
to be unworkable; she preferred to re-establish a discredited system, and
to leave to Prussia time and opportunity to gather strength for the
inevitable conflict.

[Sidenote: Triumph of Austria.]

In 1851 Austria had apparently triumphed over all its [v.03 p.0017]
difficulties. The revolutionary movements had been suppressed, the attempt
of Prussia to assume the leadership in Germany defeated, the old Federal
Diet of 1815 had been restored. Vienna again became the centre of a
despotic government the objects of which were to Germanize the Magyars and
Slavs, to check all agitation for a constitution, and to suppress all
attempts to secure a free press. For some ten years the Austrian dominion
groaned under one of the worst possible forms of autocratic government. The
failure of the Habsburg emperor to perpetuate this despotic régime was due
(1) to the Crimean War, (2) to the establishment of Italian unity, and (3)
to the successful assertion by Prussia of its claim to the leadership in
Germany. The disputes which resulted in the Crimean War revealed the fact
that "gratitude" plays but a small part in international affairs. In the
minds of Austrian statesmen the question of the free navigation of the
Danube, which would have been imperilled by a Russian occupation of the
Principalities, outweighed their sense of obligation to Russia, on which
the emperor Nicholas had rashly relied. That Austria at first took no
active part in the war was due, not to any sentimental weakness, but to the
refusal of Prussia to go along with her and to the fear of a Sardinian
attack on her Italian provinces. But, on the withdrawal of the Russian
forces from the Principalities, these were occupied by Austrian troops, and
on the 2nd of December 1854, a treaty of alliance was signed at Vienna,
between Great Britain, Austria and France, by which Austria undertook to
occupy Moldavia and Walachia during the continuance of the war and "to
defend the frontier of the said principalities against any return of the
Russian forces." By Article III., in the event of war between Russia and
Austria the alliance both offensive and defensive was to be made effective
(Hertslet, No. 252). With the progressive disasters of the Russian arms,
however, Austria grew bolder, and it was the ultimatum delivered by her to
the emperor Alexander II. in December 1855, that forced Russia to come to
terms (Treaty of Paris, March 30, 1856).

Though, however, Austria by her diplomatic attitude had secured, without
striking a blow, the settlement in her sense of the Eastern Question, she
emerged from the contest without allies and without friends. The "Holy
Alliance" of the three autocratic northern powers, recemented at
Münchengrätz in 1833, which had gained for Austria the decisive
intervention of the tsar in 1849, had been hopelessly shattered by her
attitude during the Crimean War. Russia, justly offended, drew closer her
ties with Prussia, where Bismarck was already hatching the plans which were
to mature in 1866; and, if the attitude of Napoleon in the Polish question
prevented any revival of the alliance of Tilsit, the goodwill of Russia was
assured for France in the coming struggle with Austria in Italy. Already
the isolation of Austria had been conspicuous in the congress of Paris,
where Cavour, the Sardinian plenipotentiary, laid bare before assembled
Europe the scandal of her rule in Italy. It was emphasized during the
campaign of 1859, when Sardinia, in alliance with France, laid the
foundations of united Italy. The threat of Prussian intervention, which
determined the provisions of the armistice of Villafranca, was due, not to
love of Austria, but to fear of the undue aggrandizement of France. The
campaign of 1859, and the diplomatic events that led up to it, are dealt
with elsewhere (see ITALY, ITALIAN WARS, NAPOLEON III., CAVOUR). The
results to Austria were two-fold. Externally, she lost all her Italian
possessions except Venice; internally, her failure led to the necessity of
conciliating public opinion by constitutional concessions.

The proclamation on the 26th of February 1861 of the new constitution for
the whole monarchy, elaborated by Anton von Schmerling, though far from
satisfying the national aspirations of the races within the empire, at
least gave Austria a temporary popularity in Germany; the liberalism of the
Habsburg monarchy was favourably contrasted with the "reactionary" policy
of Prussia, where Bismarck was defying the majority of the diet in his
determination to build up the military power of Prussia. The meeting of the
princes summoned to Frankfort by the emperor Francis Joseph, in 1863,
revealed the ascendancy of Austria among the smaller states of the
Confederation; but it revealed also the impossibility of any consolidation
of the Confederation without the co-operation of Prussia, which stood
outside. Bismarck had long since decided that the matter could only be
settled by the exclusion of Austria altogether, and that the means to this
end were not discussion, but "Blood and Iron." The issue was forced by the
developments of the tangled Schleswig-Holstein Question (_q.v._), which led
to the definitive breach between the two great German powers, to the
campaign of 1866, and the collapse of Austria on the field of Koniggratz
(July 3. See SEVEN WEEKS' WAR).

(W. A. P.; A. HL.)

[Sidenote: Establishment of the dual monarchy.]

The war of 1866 began a new era in the history of the Austrian empire. By
the treaty of Prague (August 23, 1866) the emperor surrendered the position
in Germany which his ancestors had held for so many centuries; Austria and
Tirol, Bohemia and Salzburg, ceased to be German, and eight million Germans
were cut off from all political union with their fellow-countrymen. At the
same time the surrender of Venetia completed the work of 1859, and the last
remnant of the old-established Habsburg domination in Italy ceased. The war
was immediately followed by a reorganization of the government. The Magyar
nation, as well as the Czechs, had refused to recognize the validity of the
constitution of 1861 which had established a common parliament for the
whole empire; they demanded that the independence of the kingdom of Hungary
should be restored. Even before the war the necessity of coming to terms
with the Hungarians had been recognized. In June 1865 the emperor Francis
Joseph visited Pest and replaced the chancellors of Transylvania and
Hungary, Counts Francis Zichy and Nadásdy, supporters of the February
constitution, by Count Majláth, a leader of the old conservative magnates.
This was at once followed by the resignation of Schmerling, who was
succeeded by Count Richard Belcredi. On the 20th of September the
Reichsrath was prorogued, which was equivalent to the suspension of the
constitution; and in December the emperor opened the Hungarian diet in
person, with a speech from the throne that recognized the validity of the
laws of 1848. Before any definite arrangement as to their re-introduction
could be made, however, the war broke out; and after the defeats on the
field of battle the Hungarian diet was able to make its own terms. They
recognized no union between their country and the other parts of the
monarchy except that which was based on the Pragmatic Sanction.[5] All
recent innovations, all attempts made during the last hundred years to
absorb Hungary in a greater Austria, were revoked. An agreement was made by
which the emperor was to be crowned at Pest and take the ancient oath to
the Golden Bull; Hungary (including Transylvania and Croatia) was to have
its own parliament and its own ministry; Magyar was to be the official
language; the emperor was to rule as king; there was to be complete
separation of the finances; not even a common nationality was recognized
between the Hungarians and the other subjects of the emperor; a Hungarian
was to be a foreigner in Vienna, an Austrian a foreigner in Budapest. A
large party wished indeed that nothing should be left but a purely personal
union similar to that between England and Hanover. Deák and the majority
agreed, however, that there should be certain institutions common to
Hungary and the rest of the monarchy; these were--(1) foreign affairs,
including the diplomatic and consular service; (2) the army and navy; (3)
the control of the expenses required for these branches of the public
service.

[Sidenote: Delegations.]

Recognizing in a declaratory act the legal existence of these common
institutions, they also determined the method by which they should be
administered. In doing so they carried out with great exactitude the
principle of dualism, establishing in form a complete parity between
Hungary on one side and the other territories of the king on the other.
They made it a condition [v.03 p.0018] that there should be constitutional
government in the rest of the monarchy as well as in Hungary, and a
parliament in which all the other territories should be represented. From
both the Hungarian and the Austrian parliament there was to be elected a
_Delegation_, consisting of sixty members; to these Delegations the common
ministers were to be responsible, and to them the estimates for the joint
services were to be submitted. The annual meetings were to be held
alternately in Vienna and in Pest. They were very careful that these
Delegations should not overshadow the parliaments by which they were
appointed. The Delegations were not to sit together; each was to meet
separately; they were to communicate by writing, every document being
accompanied by a translation in Magyar or German, as the case might be;
only if after three times exchanging notes they failed to agree was there
to be a common session; in that case there would be no discussion, and they
were to vote in silence; a simple majority was sufficient. There were to be
three ministers for common purposes--(1) for foreign affairs; (2) for war;
(3) for finance; these ministers were responsible to the Delegations, but
the Delegations were really given no legislative power. The minister of war
controlled the common army, but even the laws determining the method by
which the army was to be recruited had to be voted separately in each of
the parliaments. The minister of finance had to lay before them the common
budget, but they could not raise money or vote taxes; after they had passed
the budget the money required had to be provided by the separate
parliaments. Even the determination of the proportion which each half of
the monarchy was to contribute was not left to the Delegations. It was to
be fixed once every ten years by separate committees chosen for that
purpose from the Austrian Reichsrath and the Hungarian parliament, the
so-called _Quota-Deputations_. In addition to these "common affairs" the
Hungarians, indeed, recognized that there were certain other matters which
it was desirable should be managed on identical principles in the two
halves of the monarchy--namely, customs and excise currency; the army and
common railways. For these, however, no common institutions were created;
they must be arranged by agreement; the ministers must confer and then
introduce identical acts in the Hungarian and the Austrian parliaments.

[Sidenote: Financial settlement.]

The main principles of this agreement were decided during the spring of
1867; but during this period the Austrians were not really consulted at
all. The negotiations on behalf of the court of Vienna were entrusted to
Beust, whom the emperor appointed chancellor of the empire and also
minister-president of Austria. He had no previous experience of Austrian
affairs, and was only anxious at once to bring about a settlement which
would enable the empire to take a strong position in international
politics. In the summer of 1867, however (the Austrian Reichsrath having
met), the two parliaments each elected a deputation of fifteen members to
arrange the financial settlement. The first matter was the debt, amounting
to over 3000 million gulden, in addition to the floating debt, which had
been contracted during recent years. The Hungarians laid down the principle
that they were in no way responsible for debts contracted during a time
when they had been deprived of their constitutional liberties; they
consented, however, to pay each year 29½ million gulden towards the
interest. The whole responsibility for the payment of the remainder of the
interest, amounting annually to over a hundred million gulden, and the
management of the debt, was left to the Austrians. The Hungarians wished
that a considerable part of it should be repudiated. It was then agreed
that the two states should form a Customs Union for the next ten years; the
customs were to be paid to the common exchequer; all sums required in
addition to this to meet the expenses were to be provided as to 30% by
Hungary and as to 70% by Austria. After the financial question had been
thus settled, the whole of these arrangements were then, on the 21st and
the 24th of December 1867, enacted by the two parliaments, and the system
of dualism was established.

The acts were accepted in Austria out of necessity; but no parties were
really satisfied. The Germans, who accepted the principle of dualism, were
indignant at the financial arrangements; for Hungary, while gaining more
than an equal share of power, paid less than one-third of the common
expenses. On the other hand, according to British ideas of taxable
capacity, Hungary paid, and still pays, more than her share. The Germans,
however, could at least hope that in the future the financial arrangements
might be revised; the complaints of the Slav races were political, and
within the constitution there was no means of remedy, for, while the
settlement gave to the Hungarians all that they demanded, it deprived the
Bohemians or Galicians of any hope that they would be able to obtain
similar independence. Politically, the principle underlying the agreement
was that the empire should be divided into two portions; in one of these
the Magyars were to rule, in the other the Germans; in either section the
Slav races--the Serbs and Croatians, the Czechs, Poles and Slovenes--were
to be placed in a position of political inferiority.[6]

The logical consistency with which the principle of Dualism was carried out
is shown in a change of title. By a letter to Beust of the 14th of November
1868 the emperor ordered that he should henceforward be styled, not as
before "Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary, King of Bohemia, &c.," but
"Emperor of Austria, King of Bohemia, &c., and Apostolic King of Hungary,"
thereby signifying the separation of the two districts over which he rules.
His shorter style is "His Majesty the Emperor and King," and "His Imperial
and Apostolic Royal Majesty"; the lands over which he rules are called "The
Austrian-Hungarian Monarchy" or "The Austrian-Hungarian Realm." The new
terminology, "Imperial and Royal" (_Kaiserlich und Königlich_), has since
then been applied to all those branches of the public service which belong
to the common ministries; this was first the case with the diplomatic
service; not till 1889 was it applied to the army, which for some time kept
up the old style of _Kaiserlich-Königlich_; in 1895 it was applied to the
ministry of the imperial house, an office always held by the minister for
foreign affairs. The minister for foreign affairs was at first called the
_Reichskanzler_; but in 1871, when Andrássy succeeded Beust, this was given
up in deference to Hungarian feeling, for it might be taken to imply that
there was a single state of which he was minister. The old style
_Kaiserlich-Königlich_, the "K.K." which has become so familiar through
long use, is still retained in the Austrian half of the monarchy. There
are, therefore, _e.g._, three ministries of finance: the _Kaiserlich und
Königlich_ for joint affairs; the _Kaiserlich-Königlich_ for Austrian
affairs; the _Királyé_ for Hungary.

[Sidenote: Common affairs.]

The settlement with Hungary consisted then of three parts:--(1) the
political settlement, which was to be permanent and has since remained part
of the fundamental constitution of the monarchy; (2) the periodical
financial settlement, determining the partition of the common expenses as
arranged by the Quota-Deputations and ratified by the parliaments; (3) the
Customs Union and the agreement as to currency--a voluntary and terminable
arrangement made between the two governments and parliaments. The history
of the common affairs which fall under the management of the common
ministries is, then, the history of the foreign policy of the empire and of
the army. It is with this and this alone that the Delegations are occupied,
and it is to this that we must now turn. The annual meetings call for
little notice; they have generally been the occasion on which the foreign
minister has explained and justified his policy; according to the English
custom, red books, sometimes containing important despatches, have been
laid before them; but the debates have caused less embarrassment to the
government than is generally the case in parliamentary assemblies, and the
army budget has generally been passed with few and unimportant alterations.

[Sidenote: Foreign policy.]

For the first four years, while Beust was chancellor, the foreign policy
was still influenced by the feelings left by the war of 1866. We do not
know how far there was a real intention to revenge Königgrätz and recover
the position lost in Germany. This would be at least a possible policy, and
one to which Beust by his previous history would be inclined. There were
sharp passages of arms with the [v.03 p.0019] Prussian government regarding
the position of the South German states; a close friendship was maintained
with France; there were meetings of the emperor and of Napoleon at Salzburg
in 1868, and the next year at Paris; the death of Maximilian in Mexico cast
a shadow over the friendship, but did not destroy it. The opposition of the
Hungarians and financial difficulties probably prevented a warlike policy.
In 1870 there were discussions preparatory to a formal alliance with France
against the North German Confederation, but nothing was signed.[7] The war
of 1870 put an end to all ideas of this kind; the German successes were so
rapid that Austria was not exposed to the temptation of intervening, a
temptation that could hardly have been resisted had the result been
doubtful or the struggle prolonged. The absorption of South Germany in the
German empire took away the chief cause for friction; and from that time
warm friendship, based on the maintenance of the established order, has
existed between the two empires. Austria gave up all hope of regaining her
position in Germany; Germany disclaimed all intention of acquiring the
German provinces of Austria. Beust's retirement in 1871 put the finishing
touch on the new relations. His successor, Count Andrássy, a Hungarian,
established a good understanding with Bismarck; and in 1872 the visit of
the emperor Francis Joseph, accompanied by his minister, to Berlin, was the
final sign of the reconciliation with his uncle. The tsar was also present
on that occasion, and for the next six years the close friendship between
the three empires removed all danger of war. Three years later the full
reconciliation with Italy followed, when Francis Joseph consented to visit
Victor Emmanuel in Venice.

[Sidenote: The Eastern question.]

The outbreak of disturbance in the Balkans ended this period of calm. The
insurrection in Bosnia and Herzegovina immediately affected Austria;
refugees in large numbers crossed the frontier and had to be maintained by
the government. The political problem presented was a very difficult one.
The sympathy of the Slav inhabitants of the empire made it impossible for
the government of Vienna to regard with indifference the sufferings of
Christians in Turkey. Active support was impossible, because the
Hungarians, among whom the events of 1848 had obliterated the remembrance
of the earlier days of Turkish conquest, were full of sympathy for the
Turks. It was a cardinal principle of Austrian policy that she could not
allow the erection of new Slav states on her southern frontier. Moreover,
the disturbances were fomented by Russian agents, and any increase of
Russian influence (for which the Pan-Slav party was working) was full of
danger to Austria. For a time the mediation of Germany preserved the good
understanding between the two eastern empires. In 1875 Andrássy drafted a
note, which was accepted by the powers, requiring Turkey to institute the
reforms necessary for the good government of the provinces. Turkey agreed
to do this, but the insurgents required a guarantee from the Powers that
Turkey would keep her engagements. This could not be given, and the
rebellion continued and spread to Bulgaria. The lead then passed to Russia,
and Austria, even after the outbreak of war, did not oppose Russian
measures. At the beginning of 1877 a secret understanding had been made
between the two powers, by which Russia undertook not to annex any
territory, and in other ways not to take steps which would be injurious to
Austria. The advance of the Russian army on Constantinople, however, was a
serious menace to Austrian influence; Andrássy therefore demanded that the
terms of peace should be submitted to a European conference, which he
suggested should meet at Vienna. The peace of San Stefano violated the
engagements made by Russia, and Andrássy was therefore compelled to ask for
a credit of 60 million gulden and to mobilize a small portion of the army;
the money was granted unanimously in the Hungarian Delegation, though the
Magyars disliked a policy the object of which appeared to be not the
defence of Turkey against Russia, but an agreement with Russia which would
give Austria compensation at the expense of Turkey; in the Austrian
Deputation it was voted only by a majority of 39 to 20, for the Germans
were alarmed at the report that it would be used for an occupation of part
of the Turkish territory.

[Sidenote: Bosnia and Herzegovina.]

The active share taken by Great Britain, however, relieved Austria from the
necessity of having recourse to further measures. By an arrangement made
beforehand, Austria was requested at the congress of Berlin to undertake
the occupation and administration of Bosnia and Herzegovina--an honourable
but arduous task. The provinces could not be left to the Turks; Austria
could not allow them to fall under Russian influence. The occupation was
immediately begun, and 60,000 Austrian troops, under the command of General
Philippovich,[8] crossed the frontier on the 29th of July. The work was,
however, more difficult than had been anticipated; the Mahommedans offered
a strenuous resistance; military operations were attended with great
difficulty in the mountainous country; 200,000 men were required, and they
did not succeed in crushing the resistance till after some months of
obstinate fighting. The losses on either side were very heavy; even after
the capture of Serajevo in August, the resistance was continued; and
besides those who fell in battle, a considerable number of the insurgents
were put to death under military law. The opposition in the Delegations,
which met at the end of the year, was so strong that the government had to
be content with a credit to cover the expenses for 1879 of less than half
what they had originally asked, and the supplementary estimate of
40,000,000 gulden for 1878 was not voted till the next year. In 1879 the
Porte, after long delay, recognized the occupation on the distinct
understanding that the sovereignty of the sultan was acknowledged. A civil
administration was then established, the provinces not being attached to
either half of the empire, but placed under the control of the joint
minister of finance. The government during the first two years was not very
successful; the Christian population were disappointed at finding that they
still had, as in the old days, to pay rent to the Mahommedan begs. There
were difficulties also between the Roman Catholics and the members of the
Greek Church. In 1881 disturbances in Dalmatia spread over the frontier
into Herzegovina, and another expedition had to be sent to restore order.
When this was done Benjamin de Kallay was appointed minister, and under his
judicious government order and prosperity were established in the
provinces. In accordance with another clause of the treaty of Berlin,
Austria was permitted to place troops in the sanjak of Novi-Bazar, a
district of great strategic importance, which separated Servia and
Montenegro, and through which the communication between Bosnia and Salonica
passed. This was done in September 1879, an agreement with Turkey having
specified the numbers and position of the garrison. Another slight
alteration of the frontier was made in the same year, when, during the
delimitation of the new frontier of Montenegro, the district of Spizza was
incorporated in the kingdom of Dalmatia.

[Sidenote: Italy and the Irredentists.]

The congress of Berlin indirectly caused some difficulties with Italy. In
that country was a large party which, under the name of the "Irredentists,"
demanded that those Italian-speaking districts, South Tirol, Istria and
Trieste, which were under Austrian rule, should be joined to Italy; there
were public meetings and riots in Italy; the Austrian flag was torn down
from the consulate in Venice and the embassy at Rome insulted. The
excitement spread across the frontier; there were riots in Trieste, and in
Tirol it was necessary to make some slight movement of troops as a sign
that the Austrian government was determined not to surrender any territory.
For a short time there was apprehension that the Italian government might
not be strong enough to resist the movement, and might even attempt to
realize these wishes by means of an alliance with Russia; but the danger
quickly passed away.

[Sidenote: Alliance with Germany.]

In the year 1879 the European position of the monarchy was [v.03 p.0020]
placed on a more secure footing by the conclusion of a formal alliance with
Germany. In the autumn of that year Bismarck visited Vienna and arranged
with Andrássy a treaty by which Germany bound herself to support Austria
against an attack from Russia, Austria-Hungary pledging herself to help
Germany against a combined attack of France and Russia; the result of this
treaty, of which the tsar was informed, was to remove, at least for the
time, the danger of war between Austria-Hungary and Russia. It was the last
achievement of Andrássy, who had already resigned, but it was maintained by
his successor, Baron Haymerle, and after his death in 1881 by Count
Kalnóky. It was strengthened in 1882 by the adhesion of Italy, for after
1881 the Italians required support, owing to the French occupation of
Tunis, and after five years it was renewed. Since that time it has been the
foundation on which the policy of Austria-Hungary has depended, and it has
survived all dangers arising either from commercial differences (as between
1880 and 1890) or national discord. The alliance was naturally very popular
among the German Austrians; some of them went so far as to attempt to use
it to influence internal policy, and suggested that fidelity to this
alliance required that there should be a ministry at Vienna which supported
the Germans in their internal struggle with the Slavs; they represented it
as a national alliance of the Teutonic races, and there were some Germans
in the empire who supported them in this view. The governments on both
sides could of course give no countenance to this theory; Bismarck
especially was very careful never to let it be supposed that he desired to
exercise influence over the internal affairs of his ally. Had he done so,
the strong anti-German passions of the Czechs and Poles, always inclined to
an alliance with France, would have been aroused, and no government could
have maintained the alliance. After 1880, the exertions of Count Kalnóky
again established a fairly good understanding with Russia, as was shown by
the meetings of Francis Joseph with the tsar in 1884 and 1885, but the
outbreak of the Bulgarian question in 1885 again brought into prominence
the opposed interests of Russia and Austria-Hungary. In the December of
this year Austria-Hungary indeed decisively interfered in the war between
Bulgaria and Servia, for at this time Austrian influence predominated in
Servia, and after the battle of Slivnitza the Austro-Hungarian minister
warned Prince Alexander of Bulgaria that if he advanced farther he would be
met by Austro-Hungarian as well as Servian troops. But after the abdication
of Alexander, Count Kalnóky stated in the Delegations that Austria-Hungary
would not permit Russia to interfere with the independence of Bulgaria.
This decided step was required by Hungarian feeling, but it was a policy in
which Austria-Hungary could not depend on the support of Germany, for--as
Bismarck stated--Bulgaria was not worth the bones of a single Pomeranian
grenadier. Austria-Hungary also differed from Russia as to the position of
Prince Ferdinand of Bulgaria, and during 1886-1887 much alarm was caused by
the massing of Russian troops on the Galician frontier. Councils of war
were summoned to consider how this exposed and distant province was to be
defended, and for some months war was considered inevitable; but the danger
was averted by the renewal of the Triple Alliance and the other decisive
steps taken at this time by the German government (see GERMANY).[9]

Since this time the foreign policy of Austria-Hungary has been peaceful and
unambitious; the close connexion with Germany has so far been maintained,
though during the last few years it has been increasingly difficult to
prevent the violent passions engendered by national enmity at home from
reacting on the foreign policy of the monarchy; it would scarcely be
possible to do so, were it not that discussions on foreign policy take
place not in the parliaments but in the Delegations where the numbers are
fewer and the passions cooler. In May 1895 Count Kalnóky had to retire,
owing to a difference with Bánffy, the Hungarian premier, arising out of
the struggle with Rome. He was succeeded by Count Goluchowski, the son of a
well-known Polish statesman. In 1898 the expulsion of Austrian subjects
from Prussia, in connexion with the Anti-Polish policy of the Prussian
government, caused a passing irritation, to which Count Thun, the Austrian
premier, gave expression. The chief objects of the government in recent
years have been to maintain Austro-Hungarian trade and influence in the
Balkan states by the building of railways, by the opening of the Danube for
navigation, and by commercial treaties with Rumania, Servia and Bulgaria;
since the abdication of King Milan especially, the affairs of Servia and
the growth of Russian influence in that country have caused serious
anxiety.

[Sidenote: The army.]

The disturbed state of European politics and the great increase in the
military establishments of other countries made it desirable for Austria
also to strengthen her military resources. The bad condition of the
finances rendered it, however, impossible to carry out any very great
measures. In 1868 there had been introduced compulsory military service in
both Austria and Hungary; the total of the army available in war had been
fixed at 800,000 men. Besides this joint army placed under the joint
ministry of war, there was in each part of the monarchy a separate militia
and a separate minister for national defence. In Hungary this national
force or _honvéd_ was kept quite distinct from the ordinary army; in
Austria, however (except in Dalmatia and Tirol, where there was a separate
local militia), the _Landwehr_, as it was called, was practically organized
as part of the standing army. At the renewal of the periodical financial
and economic settlement (_Ausgleich_) in 1877 no important change was made,
but in 1882 the system of compulsory service was extended to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and a reorganization was carried out, including the
introduction of army corps and local organization on the Prussian plan.
This was useful for the purposes of speedy mobilization, though there was
some danger that the local and national spirit might penetrate into the
army. In 1886 a law was carried in either parliament creating a
_Landsturm_, and providing for the arming and organization of the whole
male population up to the age of forty-two in case of emergency, and in
1889 a small increase was made in the annual number of recruits. A further
increase was made in 1892-1893. In contrast, however, with the military
history of other continental powers, that of Austria-Hungary shows a small
increase in the army establishment. Of recent years there have been signs
of an attempt to tamper with the use of German as the common language for
the whole army. This, which is now the principal remnant of the old
ascendancy of German, and the one point of unity for the whole monarchy, is
a matter on which the government and the monarch allow no concession, but
in the Hungarian parliament protests against it have been raised, and in
1899 and 1900 it was necessary to punish recruits from Bohemia, who
answered the roll call in the Czechish _zde_ instead of the German _hier_.

[Sidenote: The Customs Union.]

In those matters which belong to the periodical and terminable agreement,
the most important is the Customs Union, which was established in 1867, and
it is convenient to treat separately the commercial policy of the dual
state.[10] At first the customs tariff in Austria-Hungary, as in most other
countries, was based on a number of commercial treaties with Germany,
France, Italy, Great Britain, &c., each of which specified the maximum
duties that could be levied on certain articles, and all of which contained
a "most favoured nation" clause. The practical result was a system very
nearly approaching to the absence of any customs duties, and for the period
for which these treaties lasted a revision of the tariff could not be
carried out by means of legislation. After the year 1873, a strong movement
in favour of protective duties made itself felt among the Austrian
manufacturers who were affected by the competition of German, English and
Belgian goods, and Austria was influenced by the general movement in
economic thought which about this time caused the reaction [v.03 p.0021]
against the doctrines of free trade. Hungary, on the other hand, was still
in favour of free trade, for there were no important manufacturing
industries in that country, and it required a secure market for
agricultural produce. After 1875 the commercial treaties expired; Hungary
thereupon also gave notice to terminate the commercial union with Austria,
and negotiations began as to the principle on which it was to be renewed.
This was done during the year 1877, and in the new treaty, while raw
material was still imported free of duty, a low duty was placed on textile
goods as well as on corn, and the excise on sugar and brandy was raised.
All duties, moreover, were to be paid in gold--this at once involving a
considerable increase. The tariff treaties with Great Britain and France
were not renewed, and all attempts to come to some agreement with Germany
broke down, owing to the change of policy which Bismarck was adopting at
this period. The result was that the system of commercial treaties ceased,
and Austria-Hungary was free to introduce a fresh tariff depending simply
on legislation, an "autonomous tariff" as it is called. With Great Britain,
France and Germany, there was now only a "most favoured nation" agreement;
fresh commercial treaties were made with Italy (1879), Switzerland and
Servia (1881). During 1881-1882 Hungary, desiring means of retaliation
against the duties on corn and the impediments to the importation of cattle
recently introduced into Germany, withdrew her opposition to protective
duties; the tariff was completely revised, protective duties were
introduced on all articles of home production, and high finance duties on
other articles such as coffee and petroleum. At the same time special
privileges were granted to articles imported by sea, so as to foster the
trade of Trieste and Fiume; as in Germany a subvention was granted to the
great shipping companies, the Austrian Lloyd and Adria; the area of the
Customs Union was enlarged so as to include Trieste, Istria and Dalmatia,
as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 1887 a further increase of duties was
laid on corn (this was at the desire of Hungary as against Rumania, for a
vigorous customs war was being carried on at this time) and on woollen and
textile goods. Austria, therefore, during these years completely gave up
the principle of free trade, and adopted a nationalist policy similar to
that which prevailed in Germany. A peculiar feature of these treaties was
that the government was empowered to impose an additional duty
(_Retorsionszoll_) on goods imported from countries in which
Austria-Hungary received unfavourable treatment. In 1881 this was fixed at
10% (5% for some articles), but in 1887 it was raised to 30 and 15%
respectively. In 1892 Austria-Hungary joined with Germany, Italy, Belgium,
and Switzerland in commercial treaties to last for twelve years, the object
being to secure to the states of central Europe a stable and extended
market; for the introduction of high tariffs in Russia and America had
crippled industry. Two years later Austria-Hungary also arranged with
Russia a treaty similar to that already made between Russia and Germany;
the reductions in the tariff secured in these treaties were applicable also
to Great Britain, with which there still was a most favoured nation treaty.
The system thus introduced gave commercial security till the year 1903.

[Sidenote: Reform of the Currency.]

The result of these and other laws was an improvement in financial
conditions, which enabled the government at last to take in hand the
long-delayed task of reforming the currency. Hitherto the currency had been
partly in silver (gulden), the "Austrian currency" which had been
introduced in 1857, partly in paper money, which took the form of notes
issued by the Austro-Hungarian Bank. This institution had, in 1867,
belonged entirely to Austria; it had branches in Hungary, and its notes
were current throughout the monarchy, but the direction was entirely
Austrian. The Hungarians had not sufficient credit to establish a national
bank of their own, and at the settlement of 1877 they procured, as a
concession to themselves, that it should be converted into an
Austro-Hungarian bank, with a head office at Pest as well as at Vienna, and
with the management divided between the two countries. This arrangement was
renewed in 1887. In 1848 the government had been obliged to authorize the
bank to suspend cash payments, and the wars of 1859 and 1866 had rendered
abortive all attempts to renew them. The notes, therefore, formed an
inconvertible paper currency. The bank by its charter had the sole right of
issuing notes, but during the war of 1866 the government, in order to raise
money, had itself issued notes (_Staatsnoten_) to the value of 312 million
gulden, thereby violating the charter of the bank. The operation begun in
1892 was therefore threefold: (1) the substitution of a gold for a silver
standard; (2) the redemption of the _Staatsnoten_; (3) the resumption of
cash payments by the bank.

In 1867 Austria-Hungary had taken part in the monetary conference which led
to the formation of the Latin Union; it was intended to join the Union, but
this was not done. A first step, however, had been taken in this direction
by the issue of gold coins of the value of eight and four gulden. No
attempt was made, however, to regulate the relations of these coins to the
"Austrian" silver coinage; the two issues were not brought into connexion,
and every payment was made in silver, unless it was definitely agreed that
it should be paid in gold. In 1879, owing to the continued depreciation of
silver, the free coinage of silver was suspended. In 1892 laws introducing
a completely new coinage were carried in both parliaments, in accordance
with agreements made by the ministers. The unit in the new issue was to be
the krone, divided into 100 heller; the krone being almost of the same
value (24-25th) as the franc. (The twenty-krone piece in gold weighs 6.775
gr., the twenty-franc piece 6.453.) The gold krone was equal to .42 of the
gold gulden, and it was declared equal to .5 of the silver gulden, so much
allowance being made for the depreciation of silver. The first step towards
putting this act into practice was the issue of one-krone pieces (silver),
which circulated as half gulden, and of nickel coins; all the copper coins
and other silver coins were recalled, the silver gulden alone being left in
circulation. The coinage of the gold four- and eight-gulden was suspended.
Nothing more could be done till the supply of gold had been increased. The
bank was required to buy gold (during 1892 it bought over forty M. gulden),
and was obliged to coin into twenty- or ten-krone pieces all gold brought
to it for that purpose. Then a loan of 150 M. gulden at 4% was made, and
from the gold (chiefly bar gold and sovereigns) which Rothschild, who
undertook the loan, paid in, coins of the new issue were struck to the
value of over 34 million kronen. This was, however, not put into
circulation; it was used first for paying off the _Staatsnoten_. By 1894
the state was able to redeem them to the amount of 200 million gulden,
including all those for one gulden. It paid them, however, not in gold, but
in silver (one-krone pieces and gulden) and in bank notes, the coins and
notes being provided by the bank, and in exchange the newly-coined gold was
paid to the bank to be kept as a reserve to cover the issue of notes. At
the same time arrangements were made between Austria and Hungary to pay off
about 80 million of exchequer bills which had been issued on the security
of the government salt-works, and were therefore called "_salinenscheine._"
In 1899 the remainder of the _Staatsnoten_ (112 million gulden) were
redeemed in a similar manner. The bank had in this way acquired a large
reserve of gold, and in the new charter which was (after long delay) passed
in 1899, a clause was introduced requiring the resumption of cash payments,
though this was not to come into operation immediately. Then from 1st
January 1900 the old reckoning by gulden was superseded, that by krone
being introduced in all government accounts, the new silver being made a
legal tender only for a limited amount. For the time until the 1st of July
1908, however, the old gulden were left in circulation, payments made in
them, at the rate of two kronen to one gulden, being legal up to any
amount.

This important reform has thereby been brought to a satisfactory
conclusion, and at a time when the political difficulties had reached a
most acute stage. It is indeed remarkable that notwithstanding the
complicated machinery of the dual monarchy, and the numerous obstacles
which have to be overcome before a reform affecting both countries can be
carried out, the financial, the commercial, and the foreign policy has been
conducted since 1870 with success. The credit of the state has risen, the
chronic deficit has disappeared, the currency has been put on a sound
basis, and part of the unfunded debt has been paid off. Universal military
service has been introduced, and all this has been done in the presence of
difficulties greater than existed in any other civilized country.

[Sidenote: The Ausgleich with Hungary.]

Each of the financial and economic reforms described above was, of course,
the subject of a separate law, but, so far as they are determined at the
general settlement which takes place between Austria and Hungary every ten
years, they are comprised under the expression "Ausgleich" (compact or
compromise), which includes especially the determination of the Quota, and
to this extent they are all dealt with together as part of a general
settlement and bargain. In this settlement a concession on commercial
policy would be set off against a gain on the financial agreement; _e.g._
in 1877 Austria gave Hungary a share in the management of the bank, while
the arrangement for paying the bonus on exported sugar was favourable to
Austria; on the other hand, since the increased duty on coffee and
petroleum would fall more heavily on Austria, the Austrians wished to
persuade the Hungarians to pay a larger quota of the common expenses, and
there was also a dispute whether Hungary was partly responsible for a debt
of 80 M. [v.03 p.0022] gulden to the bank. Each measure had, therefore, to
be considered not only on its own merits, but in relation to the general
balance of advantage, and an amendment in one might bring about the
rejection of all. The whole series of acts had to be carried in two
parliaments, each open to the influence of national jealousy and race
hatred in its most extreme form, so that the negotiations have been
conducted under serious difficulties, and the periodical settlement has
always been a time of great anxiety. The first settlement occupied two full
years, from 1876, when the negotiations began, to June 1878, when at last
all the bills were carried successfully through the two parliaments; and it
was necessary to prolong the previous arrangements (which expired at the
end of 1877) till the middle of 1878. First the two ministries had to agree
on the drafts of all the bills; then the bills had to be laid before the
two parliaments. Each parliament elected a committee to consider them, and
the two committees carried on long negotiations by notes supplemented by
verbal discussions. Then followed the debates in the two parliaments; there
was a ministerial crisis in Austria, because the House refused to accept
the tax on coffee and petroleum which was recommended by the ministers; and
finally a great council of all the ministers, with the emperor presiding,
determined the compromise that was at last accepted. In 1887 things went
better; there was some difficulty about the tariff, especially about the
tax on petroleum, but Count Taaffe had a stronger position than the
Austrian ministers of 1877. Ten years later, on the third renewal, the
difficulties were still greater. They sprang from a double cause. First the
Austrians were determined to get a more favourable division of the common
expenses; that of 1867 still continued, although Hungary had grown
relatively in wealth.[11] Moreover, a proposed alteration in the taxes on
sugar would be of considerable advantage to Hungary; the Austrians,
therefore, demanded that henceforth the proportion should be not 68.6:31.4
but 58:42. On this there was a deadlock; all through 1897 and 1898 the
Quota-Deputations failed to come to an agreement. This, however, was not
the worst. Parliamentary government in Austria had broken down; the
opposition had recourse to obstruction, and no business could be done.
Their object was to drive out the Badeni government, and for that reason
the obstruction was chiefly directed against the renewal of the Ausgleich;
for, as this was the first necessity of state, no government could remain
in office which failed to carry it through. The extreme parties of the
Germans and the anti-Semites were also, for racial reasons, opposed to the
whole system. When, therefore, the government at the end of 1897 introduced
the necessary measures for prolonging the existing arrangements
provisionally till the differences with Hungary had been settled, scenes of
great disorder ensued, and at the end of the year the financial
arrangements had not been prolonged, and neither the bank charter nor the
Customs Union had been renewed. The government, therefore (Badeni having
resigned), had to proclaim the necessary measures by imperial warrant. Next
year it was even worse, for there was obstruction in Hungary as well as in
Austria; the Quota-Deputations again came to no agreement, and the
proposals for the renewal of the Bank charter, the reform of the currency,
the renewal of the Customs Union, and the new taxes on beer and brandy,
which were laid before parliament both at Vienna and Pest, were not carried
in either country; this time, therefore, the existing arrangements had to
be prolonged provisionally by imperial and royal warrant both in Austria
and Hungary. During 1899 parliamentary peace was restored in Hungary by the
resignation of Bánffy; in Austria, however, though there was again a change
of ministry the only result was that the Czechs imitated the example of the
Germans and resorted to obstruction so that still no business could be
done. The Austrian ministry, therefore, came to an agreement with the
Hungarians that the terms of the new Ausgleich should be finally proclaimed
in Austria by imperial warrant; the Hungarians only giving their assent to
this in return for considerable financial concessions.

The main points of the agreement were: (1) the Bank charter was to be
renewed till 1910, the Hungarians receiving a larger share in the direction
than they had hitherto enjoyed; (2) the Customs Union so far as it was
based on a reciprocal and binding treaty lapsed, both sides, however,
continuing it in practice, and promising to do so until the 31st of
December 1907. Not later than 1901 negotiations were to be begun for a
renewal of the alliance, and if possible it was to be renewed from the year
1903, in which year the commercial treaties would expire. If this were
done, then the tariff would be revised before any fresh commercial treaties
were made. If it were not done, then no fresh treaties would be made
extending beyond the year 1907, so that if the Commercial Union of Austria
and Hungary were not renewed before 1907, each party would be able to
determine its own policy unshackled by any previous treaties. These
arrangements in Hungary received the sanction of the parliament; but this
could not be procured in Austria, and they were, therefore, proclaimed by
imperial warrant; first of all, on 20th July, the new duties on beer,
brandy and sugar; then on 23rd September the Bank charter, &c. In November
the Quota-Deputations at last agreed that Hungary should henceforward pay
33-3/49, a very small increase, and this was also in Austria proclaimed in
the same way. The result was that a working agreement was made, by which
the Union was preserved.

(J. W. HE.)

[Sidenote: Austro-Hungarian crisis, 1903-1907.]

Since the years 1866-1871 no period of Austro-Hungarian development has
been so important as the years 1903-1907. The defeat of the old Austria by
Prussia at Sadowa in 1866, the establishment of the Dual Monarchy in 1867
and the foundation of the new German empire in 1871, formed the
starting-point of Austro-Hungarian history properly so called; but the
Austro-Hungarian crisis of 1903-1906--a crisis temporarily settled but not
definitively solved,--and the introduction of universal suffrage in
Austria, discredited the original interpretation of the dual system and
raised the question whether it represented the permanent form of the
Austro-Hungarian polity.

At the close of the 19th century both states of the Dual Monarchy were
visited by political crises of some severity. Parliamentary life in Austria
was paralysed by the feud between Germans and Czechs that resulted directly
from the Badeni language ordinances of 1897 and indirectly from the
development of Slav influence, particularly that of Czechs and Poles during
the Taaffe era (1879-1893). Government in Austria was carried on by
cabinets of officials with the help of the emergency clause (paragraph 14)
of the constitution. Ministers, nominally responsible to parliament, were
in practice responsible only to the emperor. Thus during the closing years
of last and the opening years of the present century, political life in
Austria was at a low ebb and the constitution was observed in the letter
rather than in spirit.

Hungary was apparently better situated. Despite the campaign of obstruction
that overthrew the Bánffy and led to the formation of the Széll cabinet in
1899, the hegemony of the Liberal party which, under various names, had
been the mainstay of dualism since 1867, appeared to be unshaken. But clear
signs of the decay of the dualist and of the growth of an extreme
nationalist Magyar spirit were already visible. The Army bills of 1889,
which involved an increase of the peace footing of the joint
Austro-Hungarian army, had been carried with difficulty, despite the
efforts of Koloman Tisza and of Count Julius Andrássy the Elder. Demands
tending towards the Magyarization of the joint army had been advanced and
had found such an echo in Magyar public opinion that Count Andrássy was
obliged solemnly to warn the country of the dangers of nationalist
Chauvinism and to remind it of its obligations under the Compact of 1867.
The struggle over the civil marriage and divorce laws that filled the
greater part of the nineties served and was perhaps intended by the Liberal
leaders to serve as a diversion in favour of the Liberal-dualist
standpoint; nevertheless, Nationalist feeling found strong expression
during the negotiations of Bánffy and Széll with various Austrian premiers
for the renewal of the economic _Ausgleich_, or "Customs and Trade
Alliance." At the end of 1902 the Hungarian premier, Széll, concluded with
the Austrian premier, Körber, a new customs and trade alliance [v.03
p.0023] comprising a joint Austro-Hungarian tariff as a basis for the
negotiation of new commercial treaties with Germany, Italy and other
states. This arrangement, which for the sake of brevity will henceforth be
referred to as the Széll-Körber Compact, was destined to play an important
part in the history of the next few years, though it was never fully
ratified by either parliament and was ultimately discarded. Its conclusion
was prematurely greeted as the end of a period of economic strife between
the two halves of the monarchy and as a pledge of a decade of peaceful
development. Events were soon to demonstrate the baselessness of these
hopes.

[Sidenote: The Army question.]

In the autumn of 1902 the Austrian and the Hungarian governments, at the
instance of the crown and in agreement with the joint minister for war and
the Austrian and Hungarian ministers for national defence, laid before
their respective parliaments bills providing for an increase of 21,000 men
in the annual contingents of recruits. 16,700 men were needed for the joint
army, and the remainder for the Austrian and Hungarian national defence
troops (Landwehr and honvéd). The total contribution of Hungary would have
been some 6500 and of Austria some 14,500 men. The military authorities
made, however, the mistake of detaining in barracks several thousand
supernumerary recruits (_i.e._ recruits liable to military service but in
excess of the annual 103,000 enrollable by law) pending the adoption of the
Army bills by the two parliaments. The object of this apparently
high-handed step was to avoid the expense and delay of summoning the
supernumeraries again to the colours when the bills should have received
parliamentary sanction; but it was not unnaturally resented by the
Hungarian Chamber, which has ever possessed a lively sense of its
prerogatives. The Opposition, consisting chiefly of the independence party
led by Francis Kossuth (eldest son of Louis Kossuth), made capital out of
the grievance and decided to obstruct ministerial measures until the
supernumeraries should be discharged. The estimates could not be
sanctioned, and though Kossuth granted the Széll cabinet a vote on account
for the first four months of 1903, the Government found itself at the mercy
of the Opposition. At the end of 1902 the supernumeraries were
discharged--too late to calm the ardour of the Opposition, which proceeded
to demand that the Army bills should be entirely withdrawn or that, if
adopted, they should be counterbalanced by concessions to Magyar
nationalist feeling calculated to promote the use of the Magyar language in
the Hungarian part of the army and to render the Hungarian regiments, few
of which are purely Magyar, more and more Magyar in character. Széll, who
vainly advised the crown and the military authorities to make timely
concessions, was obliged to reject these demands which enjoyed the secret
support of Count Albert Apponyi, the Liberal president of the Chamber and
of his adherents. The obstruction of the estimates continued. On the 1st of
May the Széll cabinet found itself without supply and governed for a time
"_ex-lex_"; Széll, who had lost the confidence of the crown, resigned and
was succeeded (June 26) by Count Khuen-Hederváry, previously ban, or
governor, of Croatia. Before taking office Khuen-Hederváry negotiated with
Kossuth and other Opposition leaders, who undertook that obstruction should
cease if the Army bills were withdrawn. Despite the fact that the Austrian
Army bill had been voted by the Reichsrath (February 19), the crown
consented to withdraw the bills and thus compelled the Austrian parliament
to repeal, at the dictation of the Hungarian obstructionists, what it
regarded as a patriotic measure. Austrian feeling became embittered towards
Hungary and the action of the crown was openly criticized.

[Sidenote: The Magyar words of command.]

Meanwhile the Hungarian Opposition broke its engagement. Obstruction was
continued by a section of the independence party; and Kossuth, seeing his
authority ignored, resigned the leadership. The obstructionists now raised
the cry that the German words of command in the joint army must be replaced
by Magyar words in the regiments recruited from Hungary--a demand which,
apart from its disintegrating influence on the army, the crown considered
to be an encroachment upon the royal military prerogatives as defined by
the Hungarian Fundamental Law XII. of 1867. Clause 11 of the law runs:--"In
pursuance of the constitutional military prerogatives of His Majesty,
everything relating to the unitary direction, leadership and inner
organization of the whole army, and thus also of the Hungarian army as a
complementary part of the whole army, is recognized as subject to His
Majesty's disposal." The cry for the Magyar words of command on which the
subsequent constitutional crisis turned, was tantamount to a demand that
the monarch should differentiate the Hungarian from the Austrian part of
the joint army, and should render it impossible for any but Magyar officers
to command Hungarian regiments, less than half of which have a majority of
Magyar recruits. The partisans of the Magyar words of command based their
claim upon clause 12 of the Fundamental Law XII. of 1867--which
runs:--"Nevertheless the country reserves its right periodically to
complete the Hungarian army and the right of granting recruits, _the fixing
of the conditions on which the recruits are granted,_ the fixing of the
term of service and all the dispositions concerning the stationing and the
supplies of the troops according to existing law both as regards
legislation and administration." Since Hungary reserved her right to fix
the conditions on which recruits should be granted, the partisans of the
Magyar words of command argued that the abolition of the German words of
command in the Hungarian regiments might be made such a condition, despite
the enumeration in the preceding clause 11, of everything appertaining to
the unitary leadership and inner organization of the joint Austro-Hungarian
army as belonging to the constitutional military prerogatives of the crown.
Practically, the dispute was a trial of strength between Magyar nationalist
feeling and the crown. Austrian feeling strongly supported the monarch in
his determination to defend the unity of the army, and the conflict
gradually acquired an intensity that appeared to threaten the very
existence of the dual system.

When Count Khuen-Hederváry took office and Kossuth relinquished the
leadership of the independence party, the extension of the crisis could not
be foreseen. A few extreme nationalists continued to obstruct the
estimates, and it appeared as though their energy would soon flag. An
attempt to quicken this process by bribery provoked, however, an outburst
of feeling against Khuen-Hederváry who, though personally innocent, found
his position shaken. Shortly afterwards Magyar resentment of an army order
issued from the cavalry manoeuvres at Chlopy in Galicia--in which the
monarch declared that he would "hold fast to the existing and well-tried
organization of the army" and would never "relinquish the rights and
privileges guaranteed to its highest war-lord"; and of a provocative
utterance of the Austrian premier Körber in the Reichsrath led to the
overthrow of the Khuen-Hederváry cabinet (September 30) by an immense
majority. The cabinet fell on a motion of censure brought forward by
Kossuth, who had profited by the bribery incident to resume the leadership
of his party.

[Sidenote: Stephen Tisza.]

An interval of negotiation between the crown and many leading Magyar
Liberals followed, until at the end of October 1903 Count Stephen Tisza,
son of Koloman Tisza, accepted a mission to form a cabinet after all others
had declined. As programme Tisza brought with him a number of concessions
from the crown to Magyar nationalist feeling in regard to military matters,
particularly in regard to military badges, penal procedure, the transfer of
officers of Hungarian origin from Austrian to Hungarian regiments, the
establishment of military scholarships for Magyar youths and the
introduction of the two years' service system. In regard to the military
language, the Tisza programme--which, having been drafted by a committee of
nine members, is known as the "programme of the nine"--declared that the
responsibility of the cabinet extends to the military prerogatives of the
crown, and that "the legal influence of parliament exists in this respect
as in respect of every constitutional right." The programme, however,
expressly excluded for "weighty political reasons affecting great interests
of the nation" the question of the military [v.03 p.0024] language; and on
Tisza's motion the Liberal party adopted an addendum, sanctioned by the
crown: "the party maintains the standpoint that the king has a right to fix
the language of service and command in the Hungarian army on the basis of
his constitutional prerogatives as recognized in clause 11 of law XII. of
1867."

Notwithstanding the concessions, obstruction was continued by the Clericals
and the extreme Independents, partly in the hope of compelling the crown to
grant the Magyar words of command and partly out of antipathy towards the
person of the young calvinist premier. In March 1904, Tisza, therefore,
introduced a drastic "guillotine" motion to amend the standing orders of
the House, but withdrew it in return for an undertaking from the Opposition
that obstruction would cease. This time the Opposition kept its word. The
Recruits bill and the estimates were adopted, the Delegations were enabled
to meet at Budapest--where they voted £22,000,000 as extraordinary
estimates for the army and navy and especially for the renewal of the field
artillery--and the negotiations for new commercial treaties with Germany
and Italy were sanctioned, although parliament had never been able to
ratify the Széll-Körber compact with the tariff on the basis of which the
negotiations would have to be conducted. But, as the autumn session
approached, Tisza foresaw a new campaign of obstruction, and resolved to
revert to his drastic reform of the standing orders. The announcement of
his determination caused the Opposition to rally against him, and when on
the 18th of November the Liberal party adopted a "guillotine" motion by a
show of hands in defiance of orthodox procedure, a section of the party
seceded. On the 13th of December the Opposition, infuriated by the
formation of a special corps of parliamentary constables, invaded and
wrecked the Chamber. Tisza appealed to the country and suffered, on the
26th of January 1905, an overwhelming defeat at the hands of a coalition
composed of dissentient Liberals, Clericals, Independents and a few
Bánffyites. The Coalition gained an absolute majority and the Independence
party became the strongest political group. Nevertheless the various
adherents of the dual system retained an actual majority in the Chamber and
prevented the Independence party from attempting to realize its programme
of reducing the ties between Hungary and Austria to the person of the joint
ruler. On the 25th of January, the day before his defeat, Count Tisza had
signed on behalf of Hungary the new commercial treaties concluded by the
Austro-Hungarian foreign office with Germany and Italy on the basis of the
Széll-Körber tariff. He acted _ultra vires_, but by his act saved Hungary
from a severe economic crisis and retained for her the right to benefit by
economic partnership with Austria until the expiry of the new treaties in
1917.

[Sidenote: Deadlock of 1905.]

A deadlock, lasting from January 1905 until April 1906, ensued between the
crown and Hungary and, to a great extent, between Hungary and Austria. The
Coalition, though possessing the majority in the Chamber, resolved not to
take office unless the crown should grant its demands, including the Magyar
words of command and customs separation from Austria. The crown declined to
concede these points, either of which would have wrecked the dual system as
interpreted since 1867. The Tisza cabinet could not be relieved of its
functions till June 1905, when it was succeeded by a non-parliamentary
administration under the premiership of General Baron Fejerváry, formerly
minister for national defence. Seeing that the Coalition would not take
office on acceptable terms, Fejerváry obtained the consent of the crown to
a scheme, drafted by Kristóffy, minister of the interior, that the dispute
between the crown and the Coalition should be subjected to the test of
universal suffrage and that to this end the franchise in Hungary be
radically reformed. The scheme alarmed the Coalition, which saw that
universal suffrage might destroy not only the hegemony of the Magyar
nobility and gentry in whose hands political power was concentrated, but
might, by admitting the non-Magyars to political equality with the Magyars,
undermine the supremacy of the Magyar race itself. Yet the Coalition did
not yield at once. Not until the Chamber had been dissolved by military
force (February 19, 1906) and an open breach of the constitution seemed
within sight did they come to terms with the crown and form an
administration. The miserable state of public finances and the depression
of trade doubtless helped to induce them to perform a duty which they ought
to have performed from the first; but their chief motive was the desire to
escape the menace of universal suffrage or, at least, to make sure that it
would be introduced in such a form as to safeguard Magyar supremacy over
the other Hungarian races.

[Sidenote: Pact of 1906.]

The pact concluded (April 8, 1906) between the Coalition and the crown is
known to have contained the following conditions:--All military questions
to be suspended until after the introduction of universal suffrage; the
estimates and the normal contingent of recruits to be voted for 1905 and
1906; the extraordinary military credits, sanctioned by the delegations in
1904, to be voted by the Hungarian Chamber; ratification of the commercial
treaties concluded by Tisza; election of the Hungarian Delegation and of
the Quota-Deputation; introduction of a suffrage reform at least as far
reaching as the Kristóffy scheme. These "capitulations" obliged the
Coalition government to carry on a dualist policy, although the majority of
its adherents became, by the general election of May 1906, members of the
Kossuth or Independence party, and, as such, pledged to the economic and
political separation of Hungary from Austria save as regards the person of
the ruler. Attempts were, however, made to emphasize the independence of
Hungary. During the deadlock (June 2, 1905) Kossuth had obtained the
adoption of a motion to authorize the compilation of an autonomous
Hungarian tariff, and on the 28th of May 1906, the Coalition cabinet was
authorized by the crown to present the Széll-Körber tariff to the Chamber
in the form of a Hungarian autonomous tariff distinct from but identical
with the Austrian tariff. This concession of form having been made to the
Magyars without the knowledge of the Austrian government, Prince Konrad
Hohenlohe, the Austrian premier, resigned office; and his successor, Baron
Beck, eventually (July 6) withdrew from the table of the Reichsrath the
whole Széll-Körber compact, declaring that the only remaining economic ties
between the two countries were freedom of trade, the commercial treaties
with foreign countries, the joint state bank and the management of excise.
If the Hungarian government wished to regulate its relationship to Austria
in a more definite form, added the Austrian premier, it must conclude a new
agreement before the end of the year 1907, when the reciprocity arrangement
of 1899 would lapse. The Hungarian government replied that any new
arrangement with Austria must be concluded in the form of a commercial
treaty as between two foreign states and not in the form of a "customs and
trade alliance."

[Sidenote: Agreement of 1907.]

Austria ultimately consented to negotiate on this basis. In October 1907 an
agreement was attained, thanks chiefly to the sobering of Hungarian opinion
by a severe economic crisis, which brought out with unusual clearness the
fact that separation from Austria would involve a period of distress if not
of commercial ruin for Hungary. Austria also came to see that separation
from Hungary would seriously enhance the cost of living in Cisleithania and
would deprive Austrian manufacturers of their best market. The main
features of the new "customs and commercial treaty" were: (1) Each state to
possess a separate but identical customs tariff. (2) Hungary to facilitate
the establishment of direct railway communication between Vienna and
Dalmatia, the communication to be established by the end of 1911, each
state building the sections of line that passed through its own territory.
(3) Austria to facilitate railway communication between Hungary and
Prussia. (4) Hungary to reform her produce and Stock Exchange laws so as to
prevent speculation in agrarian produce. (5) A court of arbitration to be
established for the settlement of differences between the two states,
Hungary selecting four Austrian and Austria four Hungarian judges, the
presidency of the court being decided by lot, and each government being
represented before the court by its own delegates. (6) Impediments [v.03
p.0025] to free trade in sugar to be practically abolished. (7) Hungary to
be entitled to redeem her share of the old Austrian debt (originally
bearing interest at 5 and now at 4.2%) at the rate of 4.325% within the
next ten years; if not redeemed within ten years the rate of capitalization
to decrease annually by 1/12% until it reaches 4.2%. This arrangement
represents a potential economy of some £2,000,000 capital for Hungary as
compared with the original Austrian demand that the Hungarian contribution
to the service of the old Austrian debt be capitalized at 4.2%. (8) The
securities of the two governments to rank as investments for savings banks,
insurance companies and similar institutions in both countries, but not as
trust fund investments. (9) Commercial treaties with foreign countries to
be negotiated, not, as hitherto, by the joint minister for foreign affairs
alone, but also by a nominee of each government. (10) The quota of Austrian
and Hungarian contribution to joint expenditure to be 63.6 and 36.4
respectively--an increase of 2% in the Hungarian quota, equal to some
£200,000 a year.

The economic dispute between Hungary and Austria was thus settled for ten
years after negotiations lasting more than twelve years. One important
question, however, that of the future of the joint State Bank, was left
over for subsequent decision. During the negotiations for the customs and
commercial treaty, the Austrian government attempted to conclude for a
longer period than ten years, but was unable to overcome Hungarian
resistance. Therefore, at the end of 1917, the commercial treaties with
Germany, Italy and other countries, and the Austro-Hungarian customs and
commercial treaty, would all lapse. Ten years of economic unity remained
during which the Dual Monarchy might grow together or grow asunder,
increasing accordingly in strength or in weakness.

(H. W. S.)

During this period of internal crisis the international position of the
Dual Monarchy was threatened by two external dangers. The unrest in
Macedonia threatened to reopen the Eastern Question in an acute form; with
Italy the irredentist attitude of the Zanardelli cabinet led in 1902-1903
to such strained relations that war seemed imminent. The southern Tirol,
the chief passes into Italy, strategic points on the Istrian and Dalmatian
coasts, were strongly fortified, while in the interior the Tauern,
Karawanken and Wochein railways were constructed, partly in order to
facilitate the movement of troops towards the Italian border. The tension
was relaxed with the fall of the Zanardelli government, and comparatively
cordial relations were gradually re-established.

[Sidenote: Balkan crisis.]

In the affairs of the Balkan Peninsula a temporary agreement with Russia
was reached in 1903 by the so-called "February Programme," supplemented in
the following October by the "Mürzsteg Programme" (see MACEDONIA; TURKEY;
EUROPE: _History_). The terms of the Mürzsteg programme were observed by
Count Goluchowski, in spite of the ruin of Russian prestige in the war with
Japan, so long as he remained in office. In October 1906, however, he
retired, and it was soon clear that his successor, Baron von Aerenthal,[12]
was determined to take advantage of the changed European situation to take
up once more the traditional policy of the Habsburg monarchy in the Balkan
Peninsula. He gradually departed from the Mürzsteg basis, and in January
1908 deliberately undermined the Austro-Russian agreement by obtaining from
the sultan a concession for a railway from the Bosnian frontier through the
sanjak of Novibazar to the Turkish terminus at Mitrovitza. This was done in
the teeth of the expressed wish of Russia; it roused the helpless
resentment of Servia, whose economic dependence upon the Dual Monarchy was
emphasized by the outcome of the war of tariffs into which she had plunged
in 1906, and who saw in this scheme another link in the chain forged for
her by the Habsburg empire; it offended several of the great powers, who
seemed to see in this railway concession the price of the abandonment by
Austria-Hungary of her interest in Macedonian reforms. That Baron von
Aerenthal was able to pursue a policy apparently so rash, was due to the
fact that he could reckon on the support of Germany. The intimate relations
between the two powers had been revealed during the dispute between France
and Germany about Morocco; in the critical division of the 3rd of March
1906 at the Algeciras Conference Austria-Hungary, alone of all the powers,
had sided with Germany, and it was a proposal of the Austro-Hungarian
plenipotentiary that formed the basis of the ultimate settlement between
Germany and France (see MOROCCO: _History_). The cordial relations thus
emphasized encouraged Baron Aerenthal, in the autumn of 1908, to pursue a
still bolder policy. The revolution in Turkey had entirely changed the face
of the Eastern Question; the problem of Macedonian reform was swallowed up
in that of the reform of the Ottoman empire generally, there was even a
danger that a rejuvenated Turkey might in time lay claim to the provinces
occupied by Austria-Hungary under the treaty of Berlin; in any case, the
position of these provinces, governed autocratically from Vienna, between a
constitutional Turkey and a constitutional Austria-Hungary, would have been
highly anomalous. In the circumstances Baron Aerenthal determined on a bold
policy. Without consulting the co-signatory powers of the treaty of Berlin,
and in deliberate violation of its provisions, the king-emperor issued, on
the 13th of October, a decree annexing Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Habsburg Monarchy, and at the same time announcing the withdrawal of the
Austro-Hungarian troops from the sanjak of Novibazar. (See EUROPE:
_History_.)

[Sidenote: Internal difficulties.]

Meanwhile the relations between the two halves of the Dual Monarchy had
again become critical. The agreement of 1907 had been but a truce in the
battle between two irreconcilable principles: between Magyar nationalism,
determined to maintain its ascendancy in an independent Hungary, and
Habsburg imperialism, equally determined to preserve the economic and
military unity of the Dual Monarchy. In this conflict the tactical
advantage lay with the monarchy; for the Magyars were in a minority in
Hungary, their ascendancy was based on a narrow and artificial franchise,
and it was open to the king-emperor to hold _in terrorem_ over them an
appeal to the disfranchised majority. It was the introduction of a
Universal Suffrage Bill by Mr Joseph Kristóffy, minister of the interior in
the "unconstitutional" cabinet of Baron Fejérváry, which brought the
Opposition leaders in the Hungarian parliament to terms and made possible
the agreement of 1907. But the Wekerle ministry which succeeded that of
Fejérváry on the 9th of April 1906 contained elements which made any
lasting compromise impossible. The burning question of the "Magyar word of
command" remained unsettled, save in so far as the fixed determination of
the king-emperor had settled it; the equally important question of the
renewal of the charter of the Austro-Hungarian State Bank had also formed
no part of the agreement of 1907. On the other hand, the Wekerle ministry
was pledged to a measure of franchise reform, a pledge which they showed no
eagerness to redeem, though the granting of universal suffrage in the
Austrian half of the Monarchy had made such a change inevitable. In March
1908 Mr Hallo laid before the Hungarian parliament a formal proposal that
the charter of the Austro-Hungarian Bank, which was to expire at the end of
1910, should not be renewed; and that, in the event of failure to negotiate
a convention between the banks of Austria and Hungary, a separate Hungarian
Bank should be established. This question, obscured during the winter by
the Balkan crisis, once more became acute in the spring of 1909. In the
Coalition cabinet itself opinion was sharply divided, but in the end the
views of the Independence party prevailed, and Dr Wekerle laid the proposal
for a separate Hungarian Bank before the king-emperor and the Austrian
government. Its reception was significant. The emperor Francis Joseph
pointed out that the question of a separate Bank for Hungary [v.03 p.0026]
did not figure in the act of 1867, and could not be introduced into it,
_especially since the capital article of the ministerial programme_, i.e.
_electoral reform, was not realized, nor near being realized_. This was
tantamount to an appeal from the Magyar _populus_ to the Hungarian _plebs_,
the disfranchised non-Magyar majority; an appeal all the more significant
from the fact that it ignored the suffrage bill brought in on behalf of the
Hungarian government by Count Julius Andrássy in November 1908, a bill
which, under the guise of granting the principle of universal suffrage, was
ingeniously framed so as to safeguard and even to extend Magyar ascendancy
(see HUNGARY: _History_). In consequence of this rebuff Dr Wekerle tendered
his resignation on the 27th of April. Months passed without it being
possible to form a new cabinet, and a fresh period of crisis and agitation
was begun.

(W. A. P.)

II. _Austria Proper since_ 1867.

As already explained, the name Austria is used for convenience to designate
those portions of the possessions of the house of Habsburg, which were not
included by the settlement of 1867 among the lands of the Hungarian crown.
The separation of Hungary made it necessary to determine the method by
which these territories[13] were henceforth to be governed. It was the
misfortune of the country that there was no clear legal basis on which new
institutions could be erected. Each of the territories was a separate
political unit with a separate history, and some of them had a historic
claim to a large amount of self-government; in many the old feudal estates
had survived till 1848. [Sidenote: The February Constitution.] Since that
year the empire had been the subject of numerous experiments in government;
by the last, which began in 1860, _Landtage_ or diets have been instituted
in each of the territories on a nearly uniform system and with nearly
identical powers, and by the constitution published in February 1861 (the
February Constitution, as it is called), which is still the ultimate basis
for the government, there was instituted a _Reichsrath_ or parliament for
the whole empire; it consisted of a House of Lords (_Herrenhaus_), in which
sat the archbishops and prince bishops, members of the imperial family, and
other members appointed for life, besides some hereditary members, and a
Chamber of Deputies. The members of the latter for each territory were not
chosen by direct election, but by the diets. The diets themselves were
elected for six years; they were chosen generally (there were slight local
differences) in the following way: (a) a certain number of bishops and
rectors of universities sat in virtue of their office; (b) the rest of the
members were chosen by four electoral bodies or _curiae_,--(1) the owners
of estates which before 1848 had enjoyed certain feudal privileges, the
so-called great proprietors; (2) the chambers of commerce; (3) the towns;
(4) the rural districts. In the two latter classes all had the suffrage who
paid at least ten gulden in direct taxes. The districts were so arranged as
to give the towns a very large representation in proportion to their
populations. In Bohemia, _e.g._, the diet consisted of 241 members: of
these five were _ex officio_ members; the feudal proprietors had seventy;
the towns and chambers of commerce together had eighty-seven; the rural
districts seventy-nine. The electors in the rural districts were 236,000,
in the towns 93,000. This arrangement seems to have been deliberately made
by Schmerling, so as to give greater power to the German inhabitants of the
towns; the votes of the proprietors would, moreover, nearly always give the
final decision to the court and the government, for the influence exercised
by the government over the nobility would generally be strong enough to
secure a majority in favour of the government policy.

This constitution had failed; territories so different in size, history and
circumstances were not contented with similar institutions, and a form of
self-government which satisfied Lower Austria and Salzburg did not satisfy
Galicia and Bohemia. The Czechs of Bohemia, like the Magyars, had refused
to recognize the common parliament on the ground that it violated the
historic rights of the Bohemian as of the Hungarian crown, and in 1865 the
constitution of 1861 had been superseded, while the territorial diets
remained. In 1867 it was necessary once more to summon, in some form or
another, a common parliament for the whole of Austria, by which the
settlement with Hungary could be ratified.

[Sidenote: Centralists and Federalists.]

This necessity brought to a decisive issue the struggle between the parties
of the Centralists and Federalists. The latter claimed that the new
constitution must be made by agreement with the territories; the former
maintained that the constitution of 1861 was still valid, and demanded that
in accordance with it the Reichsrath should be summoned and a
"constitutional" government restored. The difference between the two
parties was to a great extent, though not entirely, one of race. The kernel
of the empire was the purely German district, including Upper and Lower
Austria, Salzburg, Tirol (except the south) and Vorarlberg, all Styria
except the southern districts, and a large part of Carinthia. There was
strong local feeling, especially in Tirol, but it was local feeling similar
to that which formerly existed in the provinces of France; among all
classes and parties there was great, loyalty both to the ruling house and
to the idea of the Austrian state; but while the Liberal party, which was
dominant in Lower Austria and Styria, desired to develop the central
institutions, there was a strong Conservative and Clerical party which
supported local institutions as a protection against the Liberal influence
of a centralized parliament and bureaucracy, and the bishops and clergy
were willing to gain support in the struggle by alliance with the
Federalists.

[Sidenote: The Slavonic Lands.]

Very different was it in the other territories where the majority of the
population was not German--and where there was a lively recollection of the
time when they were not Austrian. With Palacky, they said, "We existed
before Austria; we shall continue to exist after it is gone." Especially
was this the case in Bohemia. In this great country, the richest part of
the Austrian dominions, where over three-fifths of the population were
Czech, racial feeling was supported by the appeal to historic law. A great
party, led by Palacky and Rieger, demanded the restoration of the Bohemian
monarchy in its fullest extent, including Moravia and Silesia, and insisted
that the emperor should be crowned as king of Bohemia at Prague as his
predecessors had been, and that Bohemia should have a position in the
monarchy similar to that obtained by Hungary. Not only did the party
include all the Czechs, but they were supported by many of the great nobles
who were of German descent, including Count Leo Thun, his brother-in-law
Count Heinrich Clam-Martinitz, and Prince Friedrich von Schwarzenberg,
cardinal archbishop of Prague, who hoped in a self-governing kingdom of
Bohemia to preserve that power which was threatened by the German Liberals.
The feudal nobles had great power arising from their wealth, the great
traditions of their families, and the connexion with the court, and by the
electoral law they had a large number of representatives in the diet. On
the other hand the Germans of Bohemia, fearful of falling under the control
of the Czechs, were the most ardent advocates of centralization. The Czechs
were supported also by their fellow-countrymen in Moravia, and some of the
nobles, headed by Count Belcredi, brother of the minister; but in Brünn
there was a strong German party. In Silesia the Germans had a considerable
majority, and as [v.03 p.0027] there was a large Polish element which did
not support the Czechs, the diet refused to recognize the claims of the
Bohemians.

The Poles of Galicia stood apart from the other Slav races. The
German-speaking population was very small, consisting chiefly of government
officials, railway servants and Jews; but there was a large minority (some
43%) of Ruthenes. The Poles wished to gain as much autonomy as they could
for their own province, but they had no interest in opposing the
centralization of other parts; they were satisfied if Austria would
surrender the Ruthenes to them. They were little influenced by the pan-Slav
agitation; it was desirable for them that Austria, which gave them freedom
and power, should continue strong and united. Their real interests were
outside the monarchy, and they did not cease to look forward to a
restoration of the Polish kingdom. The great danger was that they might
entangle Austria in a war with Russia.

The southern Slavs had neither the unity, nor the organization, nor the
historical traditions of the Czechs and Poles; but the Slovenes, who formed
a large majority of the population in Carniola, and a considerable minority
in the adjoining territory of Carinthia and the south of Styria, demanded
that their language should be used for purposes of government and
education. Their political ideal was an "Illyrian" kingdom, including
Croatia and all the southern Slavs in the coast district, and a not very
successful movement had been started to establish a so-called Illyrian
language, which should be accepted by both Croats and Slovenes. There was,
however, another element in the southern districts, viz. the Serbs, who,
though of the same race and language as the Croats, were separated from
them by religion. Belonging to the Orthodox Church they were attracted by
Russia. They were in constant communication with Servia and Montenegro; and
their ultimate hope, the creation of a great Servian kingdom, was less easy
to reconcile with loyalty to Austria. Of late years attempts have been made
to turn the Slovenian national movement into this direction, and to attract
the Slovenes also towards the Orthodox non-Austrian Slavs.

[Sidenote: South Dalmatia.]

In the extreme south of Dalmatia is a small district which had not formed
part of the older duchy of Dalmatia, and had not been joined to the
Austrian empire till 1814; in former years part of it formed the republic
of Ragusa, and the rest belonged to Albania. The inhabitants of this part,
who chiefly belonged to the Greek Church, still kept up a close connexion
with Albania and with Montenegro, and Austrian authority was maintained
with difficulty. Disturbances had already broken out once before; and in
1869 another outbreak took place. This district had hitherto been exempted
from military service; by the law of 1869, which introduced universal
military service, those who had hitherto been exempted were required to
serve, not in the regular army but in the militia. The inhabitants of the
district round the Bocche di Cattaro (the Bocchesi, as they are commonly
called) refused to obey this order, and when a military force was sent it
failed to overcome their resistance; and by an agreement made at Knezlac in
December 1869, Rodics, who had taken command, granted the insurgents all
they asked and a complete amnesty. After the conquest of Bosnia another
attempt was made to enforce military service; once more a rebellion broke
out, and spread to the contiguous districts of Herzegovina. This time,
however, the government, whose position in the Balkans had been much
strengthened by the occupation of the new provinces, did not fear to act
with decision. A considerable force was sent under General Baron Stephan
von Jovanovich (1828-1885); they were supported from sea by the navy, and
eventually the rebellion was crushed. An amnesty was proclaimed, but the
greater number of the insurgents sought refuge in Montenegro rather than
submit to military service.

The Italians of Trieste and Istria were the only people of the empire who
really desired separation from Austria; annexation to Italy was the aim of
the _Italianissimi_, as they were called. The feeling was less strong in
Tirol, where, except in the city of Trent, they seem chiefly to have wished
for separate local institutions, so that they should no longer be governed
from Innsbruck. The Italian-speaking population on the coast of Dalmatia
only asked that the government should uphold them against the pressure of
the Slav races in the interior, and for this reason were ready to support
the German constitutionalists.

[Sidenote: German Constitutional party.]

The party of centralization was then the Liberal German party, supported by
a few Italians and the Ruthenes, and as years went by it was to become the
National German party. They hoped by a common parliament to create the
feeling of a common Austrian nationality, by German schools to spread the
use of the German language. Every grant of self-government to the
territories must diminish the influence of the Germans, and bring about a
restriction in the use of the German language; moreover, in countries such
as Bohemia, full self-government would almost certainly mean that the
Germans would become the subject race. This was a result which they could
not accept. It was intolerable to them that just at the time when the
national power of the non-Austrian Germans was so greatly increased, and
the Germans were becoming the first race in Europe, they themselves should
resign the position as rulers which they had won during the last three
hundred years. They maintained, moreover, that the ascendancy of the
Germans was the only means of preserving the unity of the monarchy; German
was the only language in which the different races could communicate with
one another; it must be the language of the army, the civil service and the
parliament. They laid much stress on the historic task of Austria in
bringing German culture to the half-civilized races of the east. They
demanded, therefore, that all higher schools and universities should remain
German, and that so far as possible the elementary schools should be
Germanized. They looked on the German schoolmaster as the apostle of German
culture, and they looked forward to the time when the feeling of a common
Austrian nationality should obscure the national feeling of the Slavs, and
the Slavonic idioms should survive merely as the local dialects of the
peasantry, the territories becoming merely the provinces of a united and
centralized state. The total German population was not quite a third of the
whole. The maintenance of their rule was, therefore, only possible by the
exercise of great political ability, the more so, since, as we have seen,
they were not united among themselves, the clergy and Feudal party being
opposed to the Liberals. Their watchword was the constitution of 1861,
which had been drawn up by their leaders; they demanded that it should be
restored, and with it parliamentary government. They called themselves,
therefore, the Constitutional party. But the introduction of parliamentary
government really added greatly to the difficulty of the task before them.
In the old days German ascendancy had been secured by the common army, the
civil service and the court. As soon, however, as power was transferred to
a parliament, the Germans must inevitably be in a minority, unless the
method of election was deliberately arranged so as to give them a majority.
Parliamentary discussion, moreover, was sure to bring out those racial
differences which it was desirable should be forgotten, and the elections
carried into every part of the empire a political agitation which was very
harmful when each party represented a different race.

[Sidenote: Crisis of 1867.]

The very first events showed one of those extraordinary changes of policy
so characteristic of modern Austrian history. The decision of the
government on the constitutional question was really determined by
immediate practical necessity. The Hungarians required that the settlement
should be ratified by a parliament, therefore a parliament must be procured
which would do this. It must be a parliament in which the Germans had a
majority, for the system of dualism was directly opposed to the ambitions
of the Slavs and the Federalists. Belcredi, who had come into power in 1865
as a Federalist, and had suspended the constitution of 1861 on the 2nd of
January 1867, ordered new elections for the diets, which were then to elect
deputies to an extraordinary Reichsrath which should consider the
_Ausgleich_, or compact with Hungary. The wording of the decree implied
that the February constitution did not exist as of law; the Germans and
Liberals, strenuously objecting to a "feudal-federal" constitution which
would give the Slavs a preponderance in the empire, maintained that the
February constitution was still in force, and that changes could only be
introduced by a regular Reichsrath summoned in accordance with it,
protested against the decree, and, in some cases, threatened not to take
part in the elections. As the Federalists [v.03 p.0028] were all opposed to
the Ausgleich, it was clear that a Reichsrath chosen in these circumstances
would refuse to ratify it, and this was probably Belcredi's intention. As
the existence of the empire would thereby be endangered, Beust interfered;
Belcredi was dismissed, Beust himself became minister-president on the 7th
of February 1867, and a new edict was issued from Vienna ordering the diets
to elect a Reichsrath, according to the constitution, which was now said to
be completely valid. Of course, however, those diets in which there was a
Federalist majority, viz. those of Bohemia, Moravia, Carinthia and Tirol,
which were already pledged to support the January policy of the government,
did not acquiesce in the February policy; and they refused to elect except
on terms which the government could not accept. The first three were
immediately dissolved. In the elections which followed in Bohemia the
influence of the government was sufficient to secure a German majority
among the landed proprietors; the Czechs, who were therefore in a minority,
declared the elections invalid, refused to take any part in electing
deputies for the Reichsrath, and seceded altogether from the diet. The
result was that Bohemia now sent a large German majority to Vienna, and the
few Czechs who were chosen refused to take their seat in the parliament.
[Sidenote: Beust's compact with the Poles.] Had the example of the Czechs
been followed by the other Slav races it would still have been difficult to
get together a Reichsrath to pass the Ausgleich. It was, however, easier to
deal with the Poles of Galicia, for they had no historical rights to
defend; and by sending delegates to Vienna they would not sacrifice any
principle or prejudice any legal claim; they had only to consider how they
could make the best bargain. Their position was a strong one; their votes
were essential to the government, and the government could be useful to
them; it could give them the complete control over the Ruthenes. A compact
then was easily arranged.

Beust promised them that there should be a special minister for Galicia, a
separate board for Galician education, that Polish should be the language
of instruction in all secondary schools, that Polish instead of German
should be the official language in the law courts and public offices,
Ruthenian being only used in the elementary schools under strict
limitations. On these terms the Polish deputies, led by Ziemialkowski,
agreed to go to Vienna and vote for the Ausgleich.

[Sidenote: The constitution of 1867.]

When the Reichsrath met, the government had a large majority; and in the
House, in which all the races except the Czechs were represented, the
Ausgleich was ratified almost unanimously. This having been done, it was
possible to proceed to special legislation for the territories, which were
henceforward officially known as "the kingdoms and lands represented in the
Reichsrath." A series of fundamental laws were carried, which formally
established parliamentary government, with responsibility of ministers, and
complete control over the budget, and there were included a number of
clauses guaranteeing personal rights and liberties in the way common to all
modern constitutions. The influence of the Poles was still sufficient to
secure considerable concessions to the wishes of the Federalists, since if
they did not get what they wished they would leave the House, and the
Slovenes, Dalmatians and Tirolese would certainly follow them. Hence the
German Liberals were prevented from introducing direct elections to the
Reichsrath, and the functions of the Reichsrath were slightly less
extensive than they had hitherto been. Moreover, the Delegation was to be
chosen not by the House as a whole, but by the representatives of the
separate territories. This is one reason for the comparative weakness of
Austria as compared with Hungary, where the Delegation is elected by each
House as a whole; the Bohemian representatives, _e.g._, meet and choose 10
delegates, the Galicians 7, those from Trieste 1; the Delegation, is,
therefore, not representative of the majority of the chamber of deputies,
but includes representatives of all the groups which may be opposing the
government there, and they can carry on their opposition even in the
Delegation. So it came about in 1869, that on the first occasion when there
was a joint sitting of the Delegations to settle a point in the budget,
which Hungary had accepted and Austria rejected, the Poles and Tirolese
voted in favour of the Hungarian proposal.

[Sidenote: The Bürger Ministerium.]

As soon as these laws had been carried (December 1867), Beust retired from
the post of minister-president; and in accordance with constitutional
practice a parliamentary ministry was appointed entirely from the ranks of
the Liberal majority; a ministry generally known as the "Bürger
Ministerium" in which Giskra and Herbst--the leaders of the German party in
Moravia and Bohemia--were the most important members. Austria now began its
new life as a modern constitutional state. From this time the maintenance
of the revised constitution of 1867 has been the watchword of what is
called the Constitutional party. The first use which the new government
made of their power was to settle the finances, and in this their best work
was done. Among them were nearly all the representatives of trade and
industry, of commercial enterprise and financial speculation; they were the
men who hoped to make Austria a great industrial state, and at this time
they were much occupied with railway enterprise. Convinced free-traders,
they hoped by private energy to build up the fortunes of the country,
parliamentary government--which meant for them the rule of the educated and
well-to-do middle class--being one of the means to this end. They accepted
the great burden of debt which the action of Hungary imposed upon the
country, and rejected the proposals for repudiation, but notwithstanding
the protest of foreign bondholders they imposed a tax of 16% on all
interest on the debt. They carried out an extension of the commercial
treaty with Great Britain by which a further advance was made in the
direction of free trade.

[Sidenote: The Liberals and the concordat.]

Of equal importance was their work in freeing Austria from the control of
the Church, which checked the intellectual life of the people. The
concordat of 1855 had given the Church complete freedom in the management
of all ecclesiastical affairs; there was full liberty of intercourse with
Rome, the state gave up all control over the appointment of the clergy, and
in matters of church discipline the civil courts had no voice--the clergy
being absolutely subject to the power of the bishops, who could impose
temporal as well as spiritual penalties. The state had even resigned to the
Church all authority over some departments of civil life, and restored the
authority of the canon law. This was the case as regards marriage; all
disputes were to be tried before ecclesiastical courts, and the marriage
registers were kept by the priests. All the schools were under the control
of the Church; the bishops could forbid the use of books prejudicial to
religion; in elementary schools all teachers were subject to the inspection
of the Church, and in higher schools only Roman Catholics could be
appointed. It had been agreed that the whole education of the Roman
Catholic youth, in all schools, private as well as public, should be in
accordance with the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church. The authority of
the Church extended even to the universities. Some change in this system
was essential; the Liberal party demanded that the government should simply
state that the concordat had ceased to exist. To this, however, the emperor
would not assent, and there was a difficulty in overthrowing an act which
took the form of a treaty. The government wished to come to some agreement
by friendly discussion with Rome, but Pius IX. was not willing to abate
anything of his full claims. The ministry, therefore, proceeded by internal
legislation, and in 1868 introduced three laws: (1) a marriage law
transferred the decisions on all questions of marriage from the
ecclesiastical to the civil courts, abolished the authority of the canon
law, and introduced civil marriage in those cases where the clergy refused
to perform the ceremony; (2) the control of secular education was taken
from the Church, and the management of schools transferred to local
authorities which were to be created by the diets; (3) complete civil
equality between Catholics and non-Catholics was established. These laws
were carried through both Houses in May amid almost unparalleled
excitement, and at once received the imperial sanction, notwithstanding the
protest of all the bishops, led by Joseph Othmar [v.03 p.0029] von Rauscher
(1797-1875), cardinal archbishop of Vienna, who had earned his red hat by
the share he had taken in arranging the concordat of 1855, and now
attempted to use his great personal influence with the emperor (his former
pupil) to defeat the bill.

The ministry had the enthusiastic support of the German population in the
towns. They were also supported by the teaching profession, which desired
emancipation from ecclesiastical control, and hoped that German schools and
German railways were to complete the work which Joseph II. had begun. But
the hostility of the Church was dangerous. The pope, in an allocution of
22nd June 1868, declared that these "damnable and abominable laws" which
were "contrary to the concordat, to the laws of the Church and to the
principles of Christianity," were "absolutely and for ever null and void."
The natural result was that when they were carried into effect the bishops
in many cases refused to obey. They claimed that the laws were inconsistent
with the concordat, that the concordat still was in force, and that the
laws were consequently invalid. The argument was forcible, but the courts
decided against them. Rudigier, bishop of Linz, was summoned to a criminal
court for disturbing the public peace; he refused to appear, for by the
concordat bishops were not subject to temporal jurisdiction; and when he
was condemned to imprisonment the emperor at once telegraphed his full
pardon. In the rural districts the clergy had much influence; they were
supported by the peasants, and the diets of Tirol and Vorarlberg, where
there was a clerical majority, refused to carry out the school law.

On the proclamation of papal infallibility in 1870, the government took the
opportunity of declaring that the concordat had lapsed, on the ground that
there was a fundamental change in the character of the papacy. Nearly all
the Austrian prelates had been opposed to the new doctrine; many of them
remained to the end of the council and voted against it, and they only
declared their submission with great reluctance. The Old Catholic movement,
however, never made much progress in Austria. Laws regulating the position
of the Church were carried in 1874. (For the concordat see Laveleye, _La
Prusse et l'Autriche_, Paris, 1870.)

[Sidenote: Nationalism in Galicia and Bohemia.]

During 1868 the constitution then was open to attack on two sides, for the
nationalist movement was gaining ground in Bohemia and Galicia. In Galicia
the extreme party, headed by Smolka, had always desired to imitate the
Czechs and not attend at Vienna; they were outvoted, but all parties agreed
on a declaration in which the final demands of the Poles were drawn up;[14]
they asked that the powers of the Galician diet should be much increased,
and that the members from Galicia should cease to attend the Reichsrath on
the discussion of those matters with which the Galician diet should be
qualified to deal. If these demands were not granted they would leave the
Reichsrath. In Bohemia the Czechs were very active; while the Poles were
parading their hostility to Russia in such a manner as to cause the emperor
to avoid visiting Galicia, some of the Czech leaders attended a Slav
demonstration at Moscow, and in 1868 they drew up and presented to the diet
at Prague a "declaration" which has since been regarded as the official
statement of their claims. They asked for the full restoration of the
Bohemian kingdom; they contended that no foreign assembly was qualified to
impose taxes in Bohemia; that the diet was not qualified to elect
representatives to go to Vienna, and that a separate settlement must be
made with Bohemia similar to that with Hungary. This declaration was signed
by eighty-one members, including many of the feudal nobles and bishops.[15]
The German majority declared that they had forfeited their seats, and
ordered new elections. The agitation spread over the country, serious riots
took place, and with a view to keeping order the government decreed
exceptional laws. Similar events happened in Moravia, and in Dalmatia the
revolt broke out among the Bocchesi.

[Sidenote: Parliamentary breakdown of 1870.]

Before the combination of Clericals and Federalists the ministry broke
down; they were divided among themselves; Counts Taaffe and Alfred Potocki,
the minister of agriculture, wished to conciliate the Slav races--a policy
recommended by Beust, probably with the sympathy of the emperor; the others
determined to cripple the opposition by taking away the elections for the
Reichsrath from the diets. Taaffe and his friends resigned in January 1870,
but the majority did not long survive. In March, after long delay, the new
Galician demands were definitely rejected; the whole of the Polish club,
followed by the Tirolese and Slovenes, left the House, which consequently
consisted of 110 members--the Germans and German representatives from
Bohemia and Moravia. It was clearly impossible to govern with such a
parliament. Not four years had gone by, and the new constitution seemed to
have failed like the old one. The only thing to do was to attempt a
reconciliation with the Slavs. The ministry resigned, and Potocki and
Taaffe formed a government with this object. Potocki, now
minister-president, then entered on negotiations, hoping to persuade the
Czechs to accept the constitution. Rieger and Thun were summoned to Vienna;
he himself went to Prague, but after two days he had to give up the attempt
in despair. Feudals and Czechs all supported the declaration of 1868, and
would accept no compromise, and he returned to Vienna after what was the
greatest disappointment of his life. Government, however, had to be carried
on; the war between Germany and France broke out in July, and Austria might
be drawn into it; the emperor could not at such a crisis alienate either
the Germans or the Slavs. The Reichsrath and all the diets were dissolved.
This time in Bohemia the Czechs, supported by the Feudals and the
Clericals, gained a large majority; they took their seats in the diet only
to declare that they did not regard it as the legal representative of the
Bohemian kingdom, but merely an informal assembly, and refused to elect
delegates for the Reichsrath. The Germans in their turn now left the diet,
and the Czechs voted an address to the crown, drawn up by Count Thun,
demanding the restoration of the Bohemian kingdom. When the Reichsrath met
there were present only 130 out of 203 members, for the whole Bohemian
contingent was absent; the government then, under a law of 1868, ordered
that as the Bohemian diet had sent no delegates, they were to be chosen
directly from the people. Twenty-four Constitutionalists and thirty
_Declaranten_ were chosen; the latter, of course, did not go to Vienna, but
the additional twenty-four made a working majority by which the government
was carried on for the rest of the year.

[Sidenote: The ministry of Hohenwart.]

But Potocki's influence was gone, and as soon as the European crisis was
over, in February 1871, the emperor appointed a ministry chosen not from
the Liberals but from the Federalists and Clericals, led by Count Hohenwart
and A. E. F. Schäffle, a professor at the university of Vienna, chiefly
known for his writings on political economy. They attempted to solve the
problem by granting to the Federalists all their demands. So long as
parliament was sitting they were kept in check; as soon as it had voted
supplies and the Delegations had separated, they ordered new elections in
all those diets where there was a Liberal majority. By the help of the
Clericals they won enough seats to put the Liberals in a minority in the
Reichsrath, and it would be possible to revise the constitution if the
Czechs consented to come. They would only attend, however, on their own
terms, which were a complete recognition by the government of the claims
made in the Declaration. This was agreed to; and on the 12th of September
at the opening of the diet, the governor read a royal message recognizing
the separate existence of the Bohemian kingdom, and promising that the
emperor should be crowned as king at Prague. It was received with delight
throughout Bohemia, and the Czechs drew a draft constitution of fundamental
rights. On this the Germans, now that they were in a minority, left the
diet, and began preparations for resistance. In Upper Austria, Moravia and
Carinthia, where they were outvoted by the Clericals, they seceded, and the
whole work of 1867 was on the point of being overthrown. Were the movement
not stopped the constitution would be superseded, and the union with
Hungary endangered. Beust and Andrássy warned the emperor of the danger,
and the crown prince of Saxony was summoned [v.03 p.0030] by Beust to
remonstrate with him. A great council was called at Vienna (October 20), at
which the emperor gave his decision that the Bohemian demands could not be
accepted. The Czechs must come to Vienna, and consider a revision of the
constitution in a constitutional manner. Hohenwart resigned, but at the
same time Beust was dismissed, and a new cabinet was chosen once more from
among the German Liberals, under the leadership of Prince Adolf Auersperg,
whose brother Carlos had been one of the chief members in the Bürger
Ministerium. For the second time in four years the policy of the government
had completely changed within a few months. On 12th September the decree
had been published accepting the Bohemian claims; before the end of the
year copies of it were seized by the police, and men were thrown into
prison for circulating it.

[Sidenote: Auersperg's ministry, 1871 to 1879.]

Auersperg's ministry held office for eight years. They began as had the
Bürger Ministerium, with a vigorous Liberal centralizing policy. In Bohemia
they succeeded at first in almost crushing the opposition. In 1872 the diet
was dissolved; and the whole influence of the government was used to
procure a German majority. Koller, the governor, acted with great vigour.
Opposition newspapers were suppressed; cases in which Czech journalists
were concerned were transferred to the German districts, so that they were
tried by a hostile German jury. Czech manifestoes were confiscated, and
meetings stopped at the slightest appearance of disorder; and the riots
were punished by quartering soldiers upon the inhabitants. The decision
between the two races turned on the vote of the feudal proprietors, and in
order to win this a society was formed among the German capitalists of
Vienna (to which the name of _Chabrus_ was popularly given) to acquire by
real or fictitious purchase portions of those estates to which a vote was
attached. These measures were successful; a large German majority was
secured; Jews from Vienna sat in the place of the Thuns and the
Schwarzenbergs; and as for many years the Czechs refused to sit in the
diet, the government could be carried on without difficulty. A still
greater blow to the Federalists was the passing of a new electoral law in
1873. The measure transferred the right of electing members of the
Reichsrath from the diets to the direct vote of the people, the result
being to deprive the Federalists of their chief weapon; it was no longer
possible to take a formal vote of the legal representatives in any
territory refusing to appoint deputies, and if a Czech or Slovene member
did not take his seat the only result was that a single constituency was
unrepresented, and the opposition weakened. The measure was strongly
opposed. A petition with 250,000 names was presented from Bohemia; and the
Poles withdrew from the Reichsrath when the law was introduced. But enough
members remained to give the legal quorum, and it was carried by 120 to 2
votes. At the same time the number of members was increased to 353, but the
proportion of representatives from the different territories was maintained
and the system of election was not altered. The proportion of members
assigned to the towns was increased, the special representatives of the
chambers of commerce and of the landed proprietors were retained, and the
suffrage was not extended. The artificial system which gave to the Germans
a parliamentary majority continued.

[Sidenote: Czech dissensions.]

At this time the Czechs were much weakened by quarrels among themselves. A
new party had arisen, calling themselves Radicals, but generally known as
the Young Czechs. They disliked the alliance with the aristocracy and the
clergy; they wished for universal suffrage, and recalled the Hussite
traditions. They desired to take their seats in the diet, and to join with
the Germans in political reform. They violently attacked Rieger, the leader
of the Old Czechs, who maintained the alliance with the Feudalists and the
policy of passive opposition. Twenty-seven members of the diet led by Gregr
and Stadkowsky, being outvoted in the Czech Club, resigned their seats.
They were completely defeated in the elections which followed, but for the
next four years the two parties among the Czechs were as much occupied in
opposing one another as in opposing the Germans. These events might have
secured the predominance of the Liberals for many years. The election after
the reform bill gave them an increased majority in the Reichsrath.
Forty-two Czechs who had won seats did not attend; forty-three Poles stood
aloof from all party combination, giving their votes on each occasion as
the interest of their country seemed to require; the real opposition was
limited to forty Clericals and representatives of the other Slav races, who
were collected on the Right under the leadership of Hohenwart. Against them
were 227 Constitutionalists, and it seemed to matter little that they were
divided into three groups; there were 105 in the Liberal Club under the
leadership of Herbst, 57 Constitutionalists, elected by the landed
proprietors, and a third body of Radicals, some of whom were more
democratic than the old Constitutional party, while others laid more stress
on nationality. They used their majority to carry a number of important
laws regarding ecclesiastical affairs. Yet within four years the government
was obliged to turn for support to the Federalists and Clericals, and the
rule of the German Liberals was overthrown. [Sidenote: Financial crisis of
1873.] Their influence was indirectly affected by the great commercial
crisis of 1873. For some years there had been active speculations on the
Stock Exchange; a great number of companies, chiefly banks and building
societies, had been founded on a very insecure basis. The inevitable crisis
began in 1872; it was postponed for a short time, and there was some hope
that the Exhibition, fixed for 1873, would bring fresh prosperity; the hope
was not, however, fulfilled, and the final crash, which occurred in May,
brought with it the collapse of hundreds of undertakings. The loss fell
almost entirely on those who had attempted to increase their wealth by
speculative investment. Sound industrial concerns were little touched by
it, but speculation had become so general that every class of society was
affected, and in the investigation which followed it became apparent that
some of the most distinguished members of the governing Liberal party,
including at least two members of the government, were among those who had
profited by the unsound finance. It appeared also that many of the leading
newspapers of Vienna, by which the Liberal party was supported, had
received money from financiers. For the next two years political interest
was transferred from parliament to the law courts, in which financial
scandals were exposed, and the reputations of some of the leading
politicians were destroyed.[16]

[Sidenote: Fall of the Liberal ministry.]

This was to bring about a reaction against the economic doctrines which had
held the field for nearly twenty years; but the full effect of the change
was not seen for some time. What ruined the government was the want of
unity in the party, and their neglect to support a ministry which had been
taken from their own ranks. In a country like Austria, in which a mistaken
foreign policy or a serious quarrel with Hungary might bring about the
disruption of the monarchy, parliamentary government was impossible unless
the party which the government helped in internal matters were prepared to
support it in foreign affairs and in the commercial policy bound up with
the settlement with Hungary. This the constitutional parties did not do.
During discussions on the economic arrangement with Hungary in 1877 a large
number voted against the duties on coffee and petroleum, which were an
essential part of the agreement; they demanded, moreover, that the treaty
of Berlin should be laid before the House, and 112 members, led by Herbst,
gave a vote hostile to some of its provisions, and in the Delegation
refused the supplies necessary for the occupation of Bosnia. They doubtless
were acting in accordance with their principles, but the situation was such
that it would have been impossible to carry out their wishes; the only
result was that the Austrian ministers and Andrássy had to turn for help to
the Poles, who began to acquire the position of a government party, which
they have kept since then. At the beginning of 1870 Auersperg's
resignation, which had long been offered, was accepted. The
constitutionalists remained [v.03 p.0031] in power; but in the
reconstructed cabinet, though Stremayr was president, Count Taaffe, as
minister of the interior, was the most important member.

Parliament was dissolved in the summer, and Taaffe, by private
negotiations, first of all persuaded the Bohemian feudal proprietors to
give the Feudalists, who had long been excluded, a certain number of seats;
secondly, he succeeded where Potocki had failed, and came to an agreement
with the Czechs; they had already, in 1878, taken their seats in the diet
at Prague, and now gave up the policy of "passive resistance," and
consented to take their seats also in the parliament at Vienna.

[Sidenote: Count Taaffe.]

On entering the House they took the oath without reservation, but in the
speech from the throne the emperor himself stated that they had entered
without prejudice to their convictions, and on the first day of the session
Rieger read a formal reservation of right. The Liberals had also lost many
seats, so that the House now had a completely different aspect; the
constitutionalists were reduced to 91 Liberals and 54 Radicals; but the
Right, under Hohenwart, had increased to 57, and there were 57 Poles and 54
Czechs. A combination of these three parties might govern against the
constitutionalists. Taaffe, who now became first minister, tried first of
all to govern by the help of the moderates of all parties, and he included
representatives of nearly every party in his cabinet. But the Liberals
again voted against the government on an important military bill, an
offence almost as unpardonable in Austria as in Germany, and a great
meeting of the party decided that they would not support the government.
Taaffe, therefore, was obliged to turn for support to the Right. The German
members of the government resigned, their place was taken by Clericals,
Poles and Czechs, Smolka was elected president of the Lower House of the
Reichsrath, and the German Liberals found themselves in a minority opposed
by the "iron ring" of these three parties, and helpless in the parliament
of their own creation. For fourteen years Taaffe succeeded in maintaining
the position he had thus secured. He was not himself a party man; he had
sat in a Liberal government; he had never assented to the principles of the
Federalists, nor was he an adherent of the Clerical party. He continued to
rule according to the constitution; his watchword was "unpolitical
politics," and he brought in little contentious legislation. The great
source of his strength was that he stood between the Right and a Liberal
government. There was a large minority of constitutionalists; they might
easily become a majority, and the Right were therefore obliged to support
Taaffe in order to avert this. They continued to support him, even if they
did not get from him all that they could have wished, and the Czechs
acquiesced in a foreign policy with which they had little sympathy.
Something, however, had to be done for them, and from time to time
concessions had to be made to the Clericals and the Federalists.

[Sidenote: The Clericals.]

The real desire of the Clericals was an alteration of the school law, by
which the control of the schools should be restored to the Church and the
period of compulsory education reduced. In this, however, the government
did not meet them, and in 1882 the Clericals, under Prince Alfred v.
Liechtenstein, separated from Hohenwart's party and founded their own club,
so that they could act more freely. Both the new Clerical Club and the
remainder of the Conservatives were much affected by the reaction against
the doctrines of economic Liberalism. They began to adopt the principles of
Christian Socialism expounded by Rudolf Mayer and Baron von Vogelfang, and
the economic revolt against the influence of capital was with them joined
to a half-religious attack upon the Jews. They represented that Austria was
being governed by a close ring of political financiers, many of whom were
Jews or in the pay of the Jews, who used the forms of the constitution,
under which there was no representation of the working classes, to exploit
the labour of the poor at the same time that they ruined the people by
alienating them from Christianity in "godless schools." It was during these
years that the foundation for the democratic clericalism of the future was
laid. The chief political leader in this new tendency was Prince Aloys v.
Liechtenstein, who complained of the political influence exercised by the
chambers of commerce, and demanded the organization of working men in
gilds. It was by their influence that a law was introduced limiting the
rate of interest, and they co-operated with the government in legislation
for improving the material condition of the people, which had been
neglected during the period of Liberal government, and which was partly
similar to the laws introduced at the same time in Germany.

[Sidenote: Special legislation.]

There seems no doubt that the condition of the workmen in the factories of
Moravia and the oil-mines of Galicia was peculiarly unfortunate; the hours
of work were very long, the conditions were very injurious to health, and
there were no precautions against accidents. The report of a parliamentary
inquiry, called for by the Christian Socialists, showed the necessity for
interference. In 1883 a law was carried, introducing factory inspection,
extending to mines and all industrial undertakings. The measure seems to
have been successful, and there is a general agreement that the inspectors
have done their work with skill and courage. In 1884 and 1885 important
laws were passed regulating the work in mines and factories, and
introducing a maximum working day of eleven hours in factories, and ten
hours in mines. Sunday labour was forbidden, and the hours during which
women and children could be employed were limited. Great power was given to
the administrative authorities to relax the application of these laws in
special cases and special trades. This power was at first freely used, but
it was closely restricted by a further law of 1893. In 1887-1888 laws,
modelled on the new German laws, introduced compulsory insurance against
accidents and sickness. These measures, though severely criticized by the
Opposition, were introduced to remedy obvious, and in some cases terrible
social evils. Other laws to restore gilds among working men had a more
direct political object. Another form of state socialism was the
acquisition of railways by the state. Originally railways had been built by
private enterprise, supported in some cases by a state guarantee; a law of
1877 permitted the acquisition of private lines; when Taaffe retired the
state possessed nearly 5000 m. of railway, not including those which
belonged to Austria and Hungary conjointly. In 1889 a minister of railways
was appointed. In this policy military considerations as well as economic
were of influence. In every department we find the same reaction against
the doctrines of _laissez-faire_. In 1889 for the first time the Austrian
budget showed a surplus, partly the result of the new import duties, partly
due to a reform of taxation.

For a fuller description of these social reforms, see the _Jahrbuch fur
Gesetzgebung_ (Leipzig, 1886, 1888 and 1894); also the annual summary of
new laws in the _Zeitschrift fur Staatswissenschaft_ (Stuttgart). For the
Christian Socialists, see Nitti, _Catholic Socialism_ (London, 1895).

[Sidenote: The language question.]

Meanwhile it was necessary for the government to do something for the
Czechs and the other Slavs, on whose support they depended for their
majority. The influence of the government became more favourable to them in
the matter of language, and this caused the struggle of nationalities to
assume the first place in Austrian public life--a place which it has ever
since maintained. The question of language becomes a political one, so far
as it concerns the use of different languages in the public offices and law
courts, and in the schools. There never was any general law laying down
clear and universal rules, but since the time of Joseph II. German had been
the ordinary language of the government. All laws were published in German;
German was the sole language used in the central public offices in Vienna,
and the language of the court and of the army; moreover, in almost every
part of the monarchy it had become the language of what is called the
_internal service_ in the public offices and law courts; all books and
correspondence were kept in German, not only in the German districts, but
also in countries such as Bohemia and Galicia. The bureaucracy and the law
courts had therefore become a network of German-speaking officialism
extending over the whole country; no one had any share in the government
[v.03 p.0032] unless he could speak and write German. The only exception
was in the Italian districts; not only in Italy itself (in Lombardy, and
afterwards in Venetia), but in South Tirol, Trieste, Istria and Dalmatia,
Italian has always been used, even for the internal service of the
government offices, and though the actual words of command are now given in
German and the officers are obliged to know Serbo-Croatian it remains to
this day the language of the Austrian navy. Any interference with the use
of German would be a serious blow to the cause of those who hoped to
Germanize the whole empire. Since 1867 the old rules have been maintained
absolutely as regards the army, and German has also, as required by the
military authorities, become the language of the railway administration. It
remains the language of the central offices in Vienna, and is the usual,
though not the only, language used in the Reichsrath. In 1869 a great
innovation was made, when Polish was introduced throughout the whole of
Galicia as the normal language of government; and since that time the use
of German has almost entirely disappeared in that territory. Similar
innovations have also begun, as we shall see, in other parts.

Different from this is what is called the _external service_. Even in the
old days it was customary to use the language of the district in
communication between the government offices and private individuals, and
evidence could be given in the law courts in the language generally spoken.
This was not the result of any law, but depended on administrative
regulations of the government service; it was practically necessary in
remote districts, such as Galicia and Bukovina, where few of the population
understood German. In some places a Slav-speaking individual would himself
have to provide the interpreter, and approach the government in German.
Local authorities, _e.g._ town councils and the diets, were free to use
what language they wished, and in this matter the Austrian government has
shown great liberality. The constitution of 1867 laid down a principle of
much importance, by which previous custom became established as a right.
Article 19 runs: "All races of the empire have equal rights, and every race
has an inviolable right to the preservation and use of its own nationality
and language. The equality of all customary (_landesüblich_) languages in
school, office and public life, is recognized by the state. In those
territories in which several races dwell, the public and educational
institutions are to be so arranged that, without applying compulsion to
learn a second _Landessprache_, each of the races receives the necessary
means of education in its own language." The application of this law gives
great power to the government, for everything depends on what is meant by
_landesüblich_, and it rests with them to determine when a language is
customary. The Germans demand the recognition of German as a customary
language in every part of the empire, so that a German may claim to have
his business attended to in his own language, even in Dalmatia and Galicia.
In Bohemia the Czechs claim that their language shall be recognized as
customary, even in those districts such as Reichenberg, which are almost
completely German; the Germans, on the other hand, claim that the Czech
language shall only be recognized in those towns and districts where there
is a considerable Czech population. What Taaffe's Administration did was to
interpret this law in a sense more favourable to the Slavs than had
hitherto been the case.

Peculiar importance is attached to the question of education. The law of
1867 required that the education in the elementary schools in the Slav
districts should be given in Czech or Slovenian, as the case might be. The
Slavs, however, required that, even when a small minority of Slav race
settled in any town, they should not be compelled to go to the German
schools, but should have their own school provided for them; and this
demand was granted by Prazak, minister of education under Count Taaffe. The
Germans had always hoped that the people as they became educated would
cease to use their own particular language. Owing to economic causes the
Slavs, who increase more rapidly than the Germans, tend to move westwards,
and large numbers settle in the towns and manufacturing districts. It might
have been expected that they would then cease to use their own language and
become Germanized; but, on the contrary, the movement of population is
spreading their language and they claim that special schools should be
provided for them, and that men of their own nationality should be
appointed to government offices to deal with their business. This has
happened not only in many places in Bohemia, but in Styria, and even in
Vienna, where there has been a great increase in the Czech population and a
Czech school has been founded. The introduction of Slavonic into the middle
and higher schools has affected the Germans in their most sensitive point.
They have always insisted that German is the _Kultur-sprache_. On one
occasion Count A. Auersperg (Anastasius Grün) entered the diet of Carniola
carrying the whole of the Slovenian literature under his arm, as evidence
that the Slovenian language could not well be substituted for German as a
medium of higher education.

The first important regulations which were issued under the law of 1867
applied to Dalmatia, and for that country between 1872 and 1876 a series of
laws and edicts were issued determining to what extent the Slavonic idioms
were to be recognized. Hitherto all business had been done in Italian, the
language of a small minority living in the seaport towns. The effect of
these laws has been to raise Croatian to equality with Italian. It has been
introduced in all schools, so that nearly all education is given in
Croatian, even though a knowledge of Italian is quite essential for the
maritime population; and it is only in one or two towns, such as Zara, the
ancient capital of the country, that Italian is able to maintain itself.
Since 1882 there has been a Slav majority in the diet, and Italian has been
disused in the proceedings of that body. In this case the concessions to
the Servo-Croatians had been made by the Liberal ministry; they required
the parliamentary support of the Dalmatian representatives, who were more
numerous than the Italian, and it was also necessary to cultivate the
loyalty of the Slav races in this part so as to gain a support for Austria
against the Russian party, which was very active in the Balkan Peninsula.
It was better to sacrifice the Italians of Dalmatia than the Germans of
Carinthia.[17]

It was not till 1879 that the Slovenes received the support of the
government. In Carniola they succeeded, in 1882, in winning a majority in
the diet, and from this time, while the diet of Styria is the centre of the
German, that of Carniola is the chief support of the Slovene agitation. In
the same year they won the majority in the town council of Laibach, which
had hitherto been German. They were able, therefore, to introduce Illyrian
as the official language, and cause the names of the streets to be written
up in Illyrian. This question of street names is, as it were, a sign of
victory. Serious riots broke out in some of the towns of Istria when, for
the first time, Illyrian was used for this purpose as well as Italian. In
Prague the victory of the Czechs has been marked by the removal of all
German street names, and the Czech town council even passed a by-law
forbidding private individuals to have tablets put up with the name of the
street in German. In consequence of a motion by the Slovene members of the
Reichsrath and a resolution of the diet of Carniola, the government also
declared Slovenian to be a recognized language for the whole of Carniola,
for the district of Cilli in Styria, and for the Slovene and mixed
districts in the south of Carinthia, and determined that in Laibach a
Slovene gymnasium should be maintained as well as the German one.

The Germans complain that in many cases the government acted very unfairly
to them. They constantly refer to the case of Klagenfurt. This town in
Carinthia had a population of 16,491 German-speaking Austrians; the
Slovenian-speaking population numbered 568, of whom 180 were inhabitants of
the gaol or the hospital. The government, however, in 1880 declared
Slovenian a customary language, so that provision had to be made in public
offices and law courts for dealing with business in Slovenian. It must be
remembered, however, that even though the town was German, the rural
population of the surrounding villages was chiefly Slovene.

It was in Bohemia and Moravia that the contest was fought out with the
greatest vehemence. The two races were nearly equal, and the victory of
Czech would mean that nearly two [v.03 p.0033] million Germans would be
placed in a position of subordination; but for the last twenty years there
had been a constant encroachment by Czech on German. This was partly due to
the direct action of the government. An ordinance of 1880 determined that
henceforward all business which had been brought before any government
office or law court should be dealt with, within the office, in the
language in which it was introduced; this applied to the whole of Bohemia
and Moravia, and meant that Czech would henceforward have a position within
the government service. It was another step in the same direction when, in
1886, it was ordered that "to avoid frequent translations" business
introduced in Czech should be dealt with in the same language in the high
courts of Prague and Brünn. Then not only were a large number of Czech
elementary schools founded, but also many middle schools were given to the
Czechs, and Czech classes introduced in German schools; and, what affected
the Germans most, in 1882 classes in Czech were started in the university
of Prague--a desecration, as it seemed, of the oldest German university.

The growth of the Slav races was, however, not merely the result of
government assistance; it had begun long before Taaffe assumed office; it
was to be seen in the census returns and in the results of elections.
Prague was no longer the German city it had been fifty years before; the
census of 1880 showed 36,000 Germans to 120,000 Czechs. It was the same in
Pilsen. In 1861 the Germans had a majority in this town; in 1880 they were
not a quarter of the population. This same phenomenon, which occurs
elsewhere, cannot be attributed to any laxity of the Germans. The
generation which was so vigorously demanding national rights had themselves
all been brought up under the old system in German schools, but this had
not implanted in them a desire to become German. It was partly due to
economic causes--the greater increase among the Czechs, and the greater
migration from the country to the towns; partly the result of the romantic
and nationalist movement which had arisen about 1830, and partly the result
of establishing popular education and parliamentary government at the same
time. As soon as these races which had so long been ruled by the Germans
received political liberty and the means of education, they naturally used
both to reassert their national individuality.

It may be suggested that the resistance to the German language is to some
extent a result of the increased national feeling among the Germans
themselves. They have made it a matter of principle. In the old days it was
common for the children of German parents in Bohemia to learn Czech; since
1867 this has ceased to be the case. It may almost be said that they make
it a point of honour not to do so. A result of this is that, as educated
Czechs are generally bilingual, it is easier for them to obtain
appointments in districts where a knowledge of Czech is required, and the
Germans, therefore, regard every order requiring the use of Czech as an
order which excludes Germans from a certain number of posts. This attitude
of hostility and contempt is strongest among the educated middle class; it
is not shown to the same extent by the clergy and the nobles.

The influence of the Church is also favourable to the Slav races, not so
much from principle as owing to the fact that they supply more candidates
for ordination than the Germans. There is no doubt, however, that the
tendency among Germans has been to exalt the principle of nationality above
religion, and to give it an absolute authority in which the Roman Catholic
Church cannot acquiesce. In this, as in other ways, the Germans in Austria
have been much influenced by the course of events in the German empire.
This hostility of the Church to the German nationalist movement led in 1898
to an agitation against the Roman Catholic Church, and among the Germans of
Styria and other territories large numbers left the Church, going over
either to Protestantism or to Old Catholicism. This "Los von Rom" movement,
which was caused by the continued alliance of the Clerical party with the
Slav parties, is more of the nature of a political demonstration than of a
religious movement.

[Sidenote: German hostility.]

The Germans, so long accustomed to rule, now saw their old ascendancy
threatened, and they defended it with an energy that increased with each
defeat. In 1880 they founded a great society, the _Deutscher Schulverein_,
to establish and assist German schools. It spread over the whole of the
empire; in a few years it numbered 100,000 members, and had an income of
nearly 300,000 gulden; no private society in Austria had ever attained so
great a success. In the Reichsrath a motion was introduced, supported by
all the German Liberal parties, demanding that German should be declared
the language of state and regulating the conditions under which the other
idioms could be recognized; it was referred to a committee from which it
never emerged, and a bill to the same effect, introduced in 1886, met a
similar fate. In Bohemia they demanded, as a means of protecting themselves
against the effect of the language ordinances, that the country should be
divided into two parts; in one German was to be the sole language, in the
other Czech was to be recognized. A proposal to this effect was introduced
by them in the diet at the end of 1886, but since 1882 the Germans had been
in a minority. The Czechs, of course, refused even to consider it; it would
have cut away the ground on which their whole policy was built up, namely,
the indissoluble unity of the Bohemian kingdom, in which German and Czech
should throughout be recognized as equal and parallel languages. It was
rejected on a motion of Prince Karl Schwarzenberg without discussion, and
on this all the Germans rose and left the diet, thereby imitating the
action of the Czechs in old days when they had the majority.

[Sidenote: New German parties.]

These events produced a great change on the character of the German
opposition. It became more and more avowedly racial; the defence of German
nationality was put in the front of their programme. The growing national
animosity added bitterness to political life, and destroyed the possibility
of a strong homogeneous party on which a government might depend. The
beginning of this movement can be traced back to the year 1870. About that
time a party of young Germans had arisen who professed to care little for
constitutionalism and other "legal mummies," but made the preservation and
extension of their own nationality their sole object. As is so often the
case in Austria, the movement began in the university of Vienna, where a
_Leseverein_ (reading club) of German students was formed as a point of
cohesion for Germans, which had eventually to be suppressed. The first
representative of the movement in parliament was Herr von Schönerer, who
did not scruple to declare that the Germans looked forward to union with
the German empire. They were strongly influenced by men outside Austria.
Bismarck was their national hero, the anniversary of Sedan their political
festival, and approximation to Germany was dearer to them than the
maintenance of Austria. After 1878 a heightening of racial feeling began
among the Radicals, and in 1881 all the German parties in opposition joined
together in a club called the United Left, and in their programme put in a
prominent place the defence of the position of the Germans as the condition
for the existence of the state, and demanded that German should be
expressly recognized as the official language. The younger and more ardent
spirits, however, found it difficult to work in harmony with the older
constitutional leaders. They complained that the party leaders were not
sufficiently decisive in the measures for self-defence. In 1885 great
festivities in honour of Bismarck's eightieth birthday, which had been
arranged in Graz, were forbidden by the government, and the Germans of
Styria were very indignant that the party did not take up the matter with
sufficient energy. After the elections of 1885 the Left, therefore, broke
up again into two clubs, the "German Austrian," which included the more
moderate, and the "German," which wished to use sharper language. The
German Club, _e.g._, congratulated Bismarck on his measures against the
Poles; the German Austrians refused to take cognizance of events outside
Austria with which they had nothing to do. Even the German Club was not
sufficiently decided for Herr von Schönerer and his friends, who broke off
from it and founded a "National German Union." They spoke much of
_Germanentum_ and _Unverfälschtes Deutschtum_, and they advocated a
political union with the German empire, and were strongly anti-Hungarian
and wished to resign all control over Galicia, if by a closer union with
Germany they could secure German supremacy in Bohemia and the south Slav
countries. They play the same part in Austria as does the "pan-Germanic
Union" in Germany. When in 1888 the [v.03 p.0034] two clubs, the German
Austrians and the Germans, joined once more under the name of the "United
German Left" into a new club with eighty-seven members, so as the better to
guard against the common danger and to defeat the educational demands of
the Clericals, the National Germans remained apart with seventeen members.
They were also infected by the growing spirit of anti-Semitism. The German
parties had originally been the party of the capitalists, and comprised a
large number of Jews; this new German party committed itself to violent
attacks upon the Jews, and for this reason alone any real harmony between
the different branches would have been impossible.

[Sidenote: The agreement with Bohemia.]

Notwithstanding the concessions about language the Czechs had, however,
made no advance towards their real object--the recognition of the Bohemian
kingdom. Perhaps the leaders of the party, who were now growing old, would
have been content with the influence they had already attained, but they
were hard pressed at home by the Young Czechs, who were more impatient.
When Count Thun was appointed governor of Bohemia their hopes ran high, for
he was supposed to favour the coronation of the emperor at Prague. In 1890,
however, instead of proceeding to the coronation as was expected, Taaffe
attempted to bring about a reconciliation between the opposing parties. The
influence by which his policy was directed is not quite clear, but the
Czechs had been of recent years less easy to deal with, and Taaffe had
never really shown any wish to alter the constitution; his policy always
was to destroy the influence of parliament by playing off one party against
the other, and so to win a clear field for the government. During the month
of January conferences were held at Vienna, with Taaffe in the chair, to
which were invited representatives of the three groups into which the
Bohemian representatives were divided, the German party, the Czechs, and
the Feudal party. After a fortnight's discussion an agreement was made on
the basis of a separation between the German and the Czech districts, and a
revision of the electoral law. A protocol enumerating the points agreed on
was signed by all who had taken part in the conference, and in May bills
were laid before the diet incorporating the chief points in the agreement.
But they were not carried; the chief reason being that the Young Czechs had
not been asked to take part in the conference, and did not consider
themselves bound by its decisions; they opposed the measures and had
recourse to obstruction, and a certain number of the Old Czechs gradually
came over to them. Their chief ground of criticizing the proposed measures
was that they would threaten the unity of the Bohemian country.[18] At the
elections in 1891 a great struggle took place between the Old and the Young
Czechs. The latter were completely victorious; Rieger, who had led the
party for thirty years, disappeared from the Reichsrath. The first result
was that the proposed agreement with Bohemia came to an end. But the
disappearance of the Old Czechs made the parliamentary situation very
insecure. The Young Czechs could not take their place: their Radical and
anti-clerical tendencies alarmed the Feudalists and Clericalists who formed
so large a part of the Right; they attacked the alliance with Germany; they
made public demonstration of their French sympathies; they entered into
communication with other Slav races, especially the Serbs of Hungary and
Bosnia; they demanded universal suffrage, and occasionally supported the
German Radicals in their opposition to the Clerical parties, especially in
educational matters; under their influence disorder increased in Bohemia, a
secret society called the _Umladina_ (an imitation of the Servian society
of that name) was discovered, and stringent measures had to be taken to
preserve order. The government therefore veered round towards the German
Liberals; some of the ministers most obnoxious to the Germans resigned, and
their places were taken by Germans. For two years the government seemed to
waver, looking now to the Left, now to Hohenwart and his friends; for a
time Taaffe really had the support of all parties except the Young Czechs.

[Sidenote: Electoral reform.]

After two years he gave up his cautious policy and took a bold move. In
October 1893 he introduced a reform bill. Universal suffrage had long been
demanded by the working men and the Socialists; the Young Czechs also had
put it on their programme, and many of the Christian Socialists and
anti-Semites desired an alteration of the franchise. Taaffe's bill, while
keeping the _curiae_ of the feudal proprietors and the chambers of commerce
as they were, and making no change in the number of members, proposed to
give the franchise in both towns and rural districts to every one who could
read and write, and had resided six months in one place. This was opposed
by the Liberals, for with the growth of socialism and anti-Semitism, they
knew that the extension of the franchise would destroy their influence. On
this Taaffe had probably calculated, but he had omitted to inquire what the
other parties would do. He had not even consulted Hohenwart, to whose
assistance he owed his long tenure of power. Not even the pleasure of
ruining the Liberals was sufficient to persuade the Conservatives to vote
for a measure which would transfer the power from the well-to-do to the
indigent, and Hohenwart justly complained that they ought to have been
secure against surprises of this kind. The Poles also were against a
measure which would give more influence to the Ruthenes. The position of
the government was hopeless, and without waiting for a division Taaffe
resigned.

[Sidenote: The coalition ministry, 1893.]

The event to which for fourteen years the Left had looked forward had now
happened. Once more they could have a share in the government, which they
always believed belonged to them by nature. Taught by experience and
adversity, they did not scruple to enter into an alliance with their old
enemies, and a coalition ministry was formed from the Left, the Clericals
and the Poles. The president was Prince Alfred Windisch-Grätz, grandson of
the celebrated general, one of Hohenwart's ablest lieutenants; Hohenwart
himself did not take office. Of course an administration of this kind could
not take a definite line on any controversial question, but during 1894
they carried through the commercial treaty with Russia and the laws for the
continuance of the currency reform. The differences of the clubs appeared,
however, in the discussions on franchise reform; the government, not strong
enough to have a policy of its own, had referred the matter to a committee;
for the question having once been raised, it was impossible not to go on
with it. This would probably have been fatal to the coalition, but the
final blow was given by a matter of very small importance arising from the
disputes on nationality. The Slovenes had asked that in the gymnasium at
Cilli classes in which instruction was given in Slovenian should be formed
parallel to the German classes. This request caused great excitement in
Styria and the neighbouring districts; the Styrian diet (from which the
Slovene minority had seceded) protested. The Slovenes were, however,
members of the Hohenwart Club, so Hohenwart and his followers supported the
request, which was adopted by the ministry. The German Left opposed it;
they were compelled to do so by the popular indignation in the German
districts; and when the vote was carried against them (12th June 1895) they
made it a question of confidence, and formally withdrew their support from
the government, which therefore at once resigned.

[Sidenote: Badeni's ministry.]

After a short interval the emperor appointed as minister-president Count
Badeni, who had earned a great reputation as governer of Galicia. He formed
an administration the merit of which, as of so many others, was that it was
to belong to no party and to have no programme. He hoped to be able to work
in harmony with the moderate elements of the Left; his mission was to carry
through the composition (_Ausgleich_) with Hungary; to this everything else
must be subordinated. During 1896 he succeeded in carrying a franchise
reform bill, which satisfied nearly all parties. All the old categories of
members were maintained, but a fifth _curia_ was added, in which almost any
one might vote who had resided six months in one place and was not in
domestic service; in this way seventy-two would be added to the existing
members. This matter having been [v.03 p.0035] settled, parliament was
dissolved. The result of the elections of 1897 was the return of a House so
constituted as to make any strong government impossible. On both sides the
anti-Semitic parties representing the extreme demagogic elements were
present in considerable numbers. The United German Left had almost
disappeared; it was represented only by a few members chosen by the great
proprietors; in its place there were the three parties--the German Popular
party, the German Nationalists, and the German Radicals--who all put
questions of nationality first and had deserted the old standpoint of the
constitution. Then there were the fourteen Social Democrats who had won
their seats under the new franchise. The old party of the Right was,
however, also broken up; side by side with forty-one Clericals there were
twenty-eight Christian Socialists led by Dr Lueger, a man of great
oratorical power, who had won a predominant influence in Vienna, so long
the centre of Liberalism, and had quite eclipsed the more modest efforts of
Prince Liechtenstein. As among the German National party, there were strong
nationalist elements in his programme, but they were chiefly directed
against Jews and Hungarians; Lueger had already distinguished himself by
his violent attacks on Hungary, which had caused some embarrassment to the
government at a time when the negotiations for the _Ausgleich_ were in
progress. Like anti-Semites elsewhere, the Christian Socialists were
reckless and irresponsible, appealing directly to the passions and
prejudices of the most ignorant. There were altogether 200 German members
of the Reichsrath, but they were divided into eight parties, and nowhere
did there seem to be the elements on which a government could be built up.

The parliamentary situation is best explained by the following table
showing the parties:--

  _German Liberals_--                  1897.      1901.
    Constitutional Landed Proprietors   28         28
    German Radicals                     49         41
    German Popular Party                42         51
    Schoenerer Group                     5         21
    Kronawetter                          1         ..
    Democrat                             1         ..
                                        --  126    --  141
  _Social Democrats_                    14         10

  _German Conservatives_--
    German Clericals                    30}        37
    German Popular Party                15}
    Christian Socialists                28         23
                                        --   73    --   60
  _Federalist Great Proprietors_        16         16

  _Czechs_--
    Young Czechs                        60         53
    Radical Young Czechs                 1          4
    Clerical Czechs                      1          2
    Agrarian Czechs                      1          6
                                        --   63    --   65

  _Poles_--
    Polish Club                         59         60
    Stoyalovski Group                    6         ..
    Popular Polish Party                 3         11
                                        --   68    --   71

  _Slovenes_--
    Clerical Slovenes                   11         ..
    Radical    "                         5         ..
                                        --   16    --   16

  _Italians_--
    Liberal Italians                    14         ..
    Clerical   "                         5         ..
                                        --   19    --   19
  _Croatians_                           11          9
  _Serbs_                                2          2
  _Ruthenes_--
    Ruthenes                             6         ..
    Young Ruthenes                       5         ..
                                        --   11    --   11
  _Rumanians_--
    Rumanians                             5        ..
    Young Rumanians                       1        ..
                                         --   6    --    5
                                            ---        ---
                               Total        425        425

The most remarkable result of the elections was the disappearance of the
Liberals in Vienna. In 1879, out of 37 members returned in Lower Austria,
33 were Liberals, but now they were replaced to a large extent by the
Socialists. It was impossible to maintain a strong party of moderate
constitutionalists, on whom the government could depend, unless there was a
large nucleus from Lower Austria. The influence of Lueger was very
embarrassing; he had now a majority of two-thirds in the town council, and
had been elected burgomaster. The emperor had refused to confirm the
election; he had been re-elected, and then the emperor, in a personal
interview, appealed to him to withdraw. He consented to do so; but, after
the election of 1897 had given him so many followers in the Reichsrath,
Badeni advised that his election as burgomaster should be confirmed. There
was violent antipathy between the Christian Socialists and the German
Nationalists, and the transference of their quarrels from the Viennese
Council Chamber to the Reichsrath was very detrimental to the orderly
conduct of debate.

[Sidenote: Socialism.]

The limited suffrage had hitherto prevented socialism from becoming a
political force in Austria as it had in Germany, and the national divisions
have always impeded the creation of a centralized socialist party. The
first object of the working classes necessarily was the attainment of
political power; in 1867 there had been mass demonstrations and petitions
to the government for universal suffrage. During the next years there was
the beginning of a real socialist movement in Vienna and in Styria, where
there is a considerable industrial population; after 1879, however, the
growth of the party was interrupted by the introduction of anarchical
doctrines. Most's paper, the _Freiheit_, was introduced through
Switzerland, and had a large circulation. The anarchists, under the
leadership of Peukert, seem to have attained considerable numbers. In
1883-1884 there were a number of serious strikes, collisions between the
police and the workmen, followed by assassinations; it was a peculiarity of
Austrian anarchists that in some cases they united robbery to murder. The
government, which was seriously alarmed, introduced severe repressive
measures; the leading anarchists were expelled or fled the country. In
1887, under the leadership of Dr Adler, the socialist party began to revive
(the party of violence having died away), and since then it has steadily
gained in numbers; in the forefront of the political programme is put the
demand for universal suffrage. In no country is the 1st of May, as the
festival of Labour, celebrated so generally.

Badeni after the election sent in his resignation, but the emperor refused
to accept it, and he had, therefore, to do the best he could and turn for
support to the other nationalities. The strongest of them were the
fifty-nine Poles and sixty Young Czechs; he therefore attempted, as Taaffe
had done, to come to some agreement with them. The Poles were always ready
to support the government; among the Young Czechs the more moderate had
already attempted to restrain the wilder spirits of the party, and they
were quite prepared to enter into negotiations. They did not wish to lose
the opportunity which now was open to them of winning influence over the
administration. What they required was further concession as to the
language in Bohemia. [Sidenote: The language ordinances of 1897.] In May
1897 Badeni, therefore, published his celebrated _ordinances_. They
determined (1) that all correspondence and documents regarding every matter
brought before the government officials should be conducted in the language
in which it was first introduced. This applied to the whole of Bohemia, and
meant the introduction of Czech into the government offices throughout the
whole of the kingdom; (2) after 1903 no one was to be appointed to a post
under the government in Bohemia until he had passed an examination in
Czech. These ordinances fulfilled the worst fears of the Germans. The
German Nationalists and Radicals declared that no business should be done
till they were repealed and Badeni dismissed. They resorted to obstruction.
They brought in repeated motions to impeach the ministers, and parliament
had to be prorogued in June, although no business of any kind had been
transacted. Badeni had not anticipated the effect his ordinances would
have; as a Pole he had little experience in the western part of the empire.
During the recess he tried to open negotiations, but [v.03 p.0036] the
Germans refused even to enter into a discussion until the ordinances had
been withdrawn. The agitation spread throughout the country; great meetings
were held at Eger and Aussig, which were attended by Germans from across
the frontier, and led to serious disturbances; the cornflower, which had
become the symbol of German nationality and union with Germany, was freely
worn, and the language used was in many cases treasonable. The emperor
insisted that the Reichsrath should again be summoned to pass the necessary
measures for the agreement with Hungary; scenes then took place which have
no parallel in parliamentary history. To meet the obstruction it was
determined to sit at night, but this was unsuccessful. On one occasion Dr
Lecher, one of the representatives of Moravia, spoke for twelve hours, from
9 P.M. till 9 A.M., against the Ausgleich. The opposition was not always
limited to feats of endurance of this kind. On the 3rd of November there
was a free fight in the House; it arose from a quarrel between Dr Lueger
and the Christian Socialists on the one side (for the Christian Socialists
had supported the government since the confirmation of Lueger as
burgomaster) and the German Nationalists under Herr Wolf, a German from
Bohemia, the violence of whose language had already caused Badeni to
challenge him to a duel. The Nationalists refused to allow Lueger to speak,
clapping their desks, hissing and making other noises, till at last the
Young Czechs attempted to prevent the disorder by violence. On the 24th of
November the scenes of disturbance were renewed. The president, Herr v.
Abrahamovitch, an Armenian from Galicia, refused to call on Schönerer to
speak. The Nationalists therefore stormed the platform, and the president
and ministers had to fly into their private rooms to escape personal
violence, until the Czechs came to their rescue, and by superiority in
numbers and physical strength severely punished Herr Wolf and his friends.
The rules of the House giving the president no authority for maintaining
order, he determined, with the assent of the ministers, to propose
alterations in procedure. The next day, when the sitting began, one of the
ministers, Count Falkenhayn, a Clerical who was very unpopular, moved "That
any member who continued to disturb a sitting after being twice called to
order could be suspended--for three days by the president, and for thirty
days by the House." The din and uproar was such that not a word could be
heard, but at a pre-arranged signal from the president all the Right rose,
and he then declared that the new order had been carried, although the
procedure of the House required that it should be submitted to a committee.
The next day, at the beginning of the sitting, the Socialists rushed on the
platform, tore up and destroyed all the papers lying there, seized the
president, and held him against the wall. After he had escaped, eighty
police were introduced into the House and carried out the fourteen
Socialists. The next day Herr Wolf was treated in the same manner. The
excitement spread to the street. Serious disorders took place in Vienna and
in Graz; the German opposition had the support of the people, and Lueger
warned the ministers that as burgomaster he would be unable to maintain
order in Vienna; even the Clerical Germans showed signs of deserting the
government. [Sidenote: Badeni resigns.] The emperor, hastily summoned to
Vienna, accepted Badeni's resignation, the Germans having thus by
obstruction attained part of their wishes. The new minister, Gautsch, a man
popular with all parties, held office for three months; he proclaimed the
budget and the Ausgleich, and in February replaced the language ordinances
by others, under which Bohemia was to be divided into three districts--one
Czech, one German and one mixed. The Germans, however, were not satisfied
with this; they demanded absolute repeal. The Czechs also were offended;
they arranged riots at Prague; the professors in the university refused to
lecture unless the German students were defended from violence; Gautsch
resigned, and Thun, who had been governor of Bohemia, was appointed
minister. Martial law was proclaimed in Bohemia, and strictly enforced.
Thun then arranged with the Hungarian ministers a compromise about the
Ausgleich.

[Sidenote: Renewed conflict between Germans and Czechs.]

The Reichsrath was again summoned, and the meetings were less disturbed
than in the former year, but the Germans still prevented any business from
being done. The Germans now had a new cause of complaint. Paragraph 14 of
the Constitutional law of 1867 provided that, in cases of pressing
necessity, orders for which the assent of the Reichsrath was required
might, if the Reichsrath were not in session, be proclaimed by the emperor;
they had to be signed by the whole ministry, and if they were not laid
before the Reichsrath within four months of its meeting, or if they did not
receive the approval of both Houses, they ceased to be valid. The Germans
contended that the application of this clause to the Ausgleich was invalid,
and demanded that it should be repealed. Thun had in consequence to retire,
in September 1899. His successor, Count Clary, began by withdrawing the
ordinances which had been the cause of so much trouble, but it was now too
late to restore peace. The Germans were not sufficiently strong and united
to keep in power a minister who had brought them the relief for which they
had been clamouring for two years. The Czechs, of course, went into
opposition, and used obstruction. The extreme German party, however, took
the occasion to demand that paragraph 14 should be repealed. Clary
explained that this was impossible, but he gave a formal pledge that he
would not use it. The Czechs, however, prevented him passing a law on
excise which was a necessary part of the agreements with Hungary; it was,
therefore, impossible for him to carry on the government without breaking
his word; there was nothing left for him to do but to resign, after holding
office for less than three months. The emperor then appointed a ministry of
officials, who were not bound by his pledge, and used paragraph 14 for the
necessary purposes of state. They then made way for a ministry under Herr
v. Körber. During the early months of 1900 matters were more peaceful, and
Körber hoped to be able to arrange a compromise; but the Czechs now
demanded the restoration of their language in the internal service of
Bohemia, and on 8th June, by noise and disturbance, obliged the president
to suspend the sitting. The Reichsrath was immediately dissolved, the
emperor having determined to make a final attempt to get together a
parliament with which it would be possible to govern. The new elections on
which so much was to depend did not take place till January 1901. They
resulted in a great increase of the extreme German Nationalist parties.
Schönerer and the German Radicals--the fanatical German party who in their
new programme advocated union of German Austria with the German empire--now
numbered twenty-one, who chiefly came from Bohemia. They were able for the
first time to procure the election of one of their party in the Austrian
Delegation, and threatened to introduce into the Assembly scenes of
disorder similar to those which they had made common in the Reichsrath. All
those parties which did not primarily appeal to national feeling suffered
loss; especially was this the case with the two sections of the Clericals,
the Christian Socialists and the Ultramontanes; and the increasing enmity
between the German Nationalists (who refused even the name German to a
Roman Catholic) and the Church became one of the most conspicuous features
in the political situation. The loss of seats by the Socialists showed that
even among the working men the national agitation was gaining ground; the
diminished influence of the anti-Semites was the most encouraging sign.

Notwithstanding the result of the elections, the first months of the new
parliament passed in comparative peace. There was a truce between the
nationalities. The Germans were more occupied with their opposition to the
Clericals than with their feud with the Slavs. The Czechs refrained from
obstruction, for they did not wish to forfeit the alliance with the Poles
and Conservatives, on which their parliamentary strength depended, and the
Germans used the opportunity to pass measures for promoting the material
prosperity of the country, especially for an important system of canals
which would bring additional prosperity to the coal-fields and manufactures
of Bohemia.

(J. W. HE.)

[Sidenote: Public works policy.]

The history of Austria since the general election of 1901 is the [v.03
p.0037] history of franchise reform as a crowning attempt to restore
parliament to normal working conditions. The premier, Dr von Körber, who
had undertaken to overcome obstruction and who hoped to effect a compromise
between Germans and Czechs, induced the Chamber to sanction the estimates,
the contingent of recruits and other "necessities of state" for 1901 and
1902, by promising to undertake large public works in which Czechs and
Germans were alike interested. These public works were chiefly a canal from
the Danube to the Oder; a ship canal from the Danube to the Moldau near
Budweis, and the canalization of the Moldau from Budweis to Prague; a ship
canal running from the projected Danube-Oder canal near Prerau to the Elbe
near Pardubitz, and the canalization of the Elbe from Pardubitz to Melnik;
a navigable connexion between the Danube-Oder Canal and the Vistula and the
Dniester. It was estimated that the construction of these four canals would
require twenty years, the funds being furnished by a 4% loan amortizable in
ninety years. In addition to the canals, the cabinet proposed and the
Chamber sanctioned the construction of a "second railway route to Trieste"
designed to shorten the distance between South Germany, Salzburg and the
Adriatic, by means of a line passing under the Alpine ranges of central and
southern Austria. The principal sections of this line were named after the
ranges they pierced, the chief tunnels being bored through the Tauern,
Karawanken and Wochein hills. Sections were to be thrown open to traffic as
soon as completed and the whole work to be ended during 1909. The line
forms one of the most interesting railway routes in Europe. The cost,
however, greatly exceeded the estimate sanctioned by parliament; and the
contention that the parliamentary adoption of the Budget in 1901-1902 cost
the state £100,000,000 for public works, is not entirely unfounded. True,
these works were in most cases desirable and in some cases necessary, but
they were hastily promised and often hastily begun under pressure of
political expediency. The Körber administration was for this reason
subsequently exposed to severe censure.

[Sidenote: Körber's parliamentary difficulties.]

Despite these public works Dr von Körber found himself unable to induce
parliament to vote the Budgets for 1903, 1904 or 1905, and was obliged to
revert to the expedient employed by his predecessors of sanctioning the
estimates by imperial ordinance under paragraph 14 of the constitution. His
attempts in December 1902 and January 1903 to promote a compromise between
Czechs and Germans proved equally futile. Körber proposed that Bohemia be
divided into 10 districts, of which 5 would be Czech, 3 German and 2 mixed.
Of the 234 district tribunals, 133 were to be Czech, 94 German and 7 mixed.
The Czechs demanded on the contrary that both their language and German
should be placed on an equal footing throughout Bohemia, and be used for
all official purposes in the same way. As this demand involved the
recognition of Czech as a language of internal service in Bohemia it was
refused by the Germans. Thenceforward, until his fall on the 31st of
December 1904, Körber governed practically without parliament. The Chamber
was summoned at intervals rather as a pretext for the subsequent employment
of paragraph 14 than in the hope of securing its assent to legislative
measures. The Czechs blocked business by a pile of "urgency motions" and
occasionally indulged in noisy obstruction. On one occasion a sitting
lasted 57 hours without interruption. In consequence of Czech
aggressiveness, the German parties (the German Progressists, the German
Populists, the Constitutional Landed Proprietors and the Christian
Socialists) created a joint executive committee and a supreme committee of
four members to watch over German racial interests.

[Sidenote: Baron Gautsch premier.]

By the end of 1904 it had become clear that the system of government by
paragraph 14, which Dr von Körber had perfected was not effective in the
long run. Loans were needed for military and other purposes, and paragraph
14 itself declares that it cannot be employed for the contraction of any
lasting burden upon the exchequer, nor for any sale of state patrimony. As
the person of the premier had become so obnoxious to the Czechs that his
removal would be regarded by them as a concession, his resignation was
suddenly accepted by the emperor, and, on the 1st of January 1905, a former
premier, Baron von Gautsch, was appointed in his stead. Parliamentary
activity was at once resumed; the Austro-Hungarian tariff contained in the
Széll-Körber compact was adopted, the estimates were discussed and the
commercial treaty with Germany ratified. In the early autumn, however, a
radical change came over the spirit of Austrian politics. For nearly three
years Austria had been watching with bitterness and depression the course
of the crisis in Hungary. Parliament had repeatedly expressed its
disapproval of the Magyar demands upon the crown, but had succeeded only in
demonstrating its own impotence. The feeling that Austria could be
compelled by imperial ordinance under paragraph 14 to acquiesce in whatever
concessions the crown might make to Hungary galled Austrian public opinion
and prepared it for coming changes. In August 1905 the crown took into
consideration and in September sanctioned the proposal that universal
suffrage be introduced into the official programme of the Fejérváry cabinet
then engaged in combating the Coalition in Hungary. It is not to be
supposed that the king of Hungary assented to this programme without
reflecting that what he sought to further in Hungary, it would be
impossible for him, as emperor of Austria, to oppose in Cisleithania. His
subsequent action justifies, indeed, the belief that, when sanctioning the
Fejérváry programme, the monarch had already decided that universal
suffrage should be introduced in Austria; but even he can scarcely have
been prepared for the rapidity with which the movement in Austria gained
ground and accomplished its object.

[Sidenote: Franchise reform.]

On the 15th of September 1905 a huge socialist and working-class
demonstration in favour of universal suffrage took place before the
parliament at Budapest. The Austrian Socialist party, encouraged by this
manifestation and influenced by the revolutionary movement in Russia,
resolved to press for franchise reform in Austria also. An initial
demonstration, resulting in some bloodshed, was organized in Vienna at the
beginning of November. At Prague, Graz and other towns, demonstrations and
collisions with the police were frequent. The premier, Baron Gautsch, who
had previously discountenanced universal suffrage while admitting the
desirability of a restricted reform, then changed attitude and permitted an
enormous Socialist demonstration, in support of universal suffrage, to take
place (November 28) in the Vienna Ringstrasse. Traffic was suspended for
five hours while an orderly procession of workmen, ten abreast, marched
silently along the Ringstrasse past the houses of parliament. The
demonstration made a deep impression upon public opinion. On the same day
the premier promised to introduce by February a large measure of franchise
reform so framed as to protect racial minorities from being overwhelmed at
the polls by majorities of other races. On the 23rd of February 1906 he
indeed brought in a series of franchise reform measures. Their main
principles were the abolition of the _curia_ or electoral class system and
the establishment of the franchise on the basis of universal suffrage; and
the division of Austria electorally into racial compartments within which
each race would be assured against molestation from other races. The
Gautsch redistribution bill proposed to increase the number of
constituencies from 425 to 455, to allot a fixed number of constituencies
to each province and, within each province, to each race according to its
numbers and tax-paying capacity. The reform bill proper proposed to
enfranchise every male citizen above 24 years of age with one year's
residential qualification.

At first the chances of the adoption of such a measure seemed small. It was
warmly supported from outside by the Social Democrats, who held only 11
seats in the House; inside, the Christian Socialists or Lueger party were
favourable on the whole as they hoped to gain seats at the expense of the
German Progressives and German Populists and to extend their own
organization throughout the empire. The Young Czechs, too, were favourable,
while the Poles reserved their attitude. Hostile [v.03 p.0038] in principle
and by instinct, they waited to ascertain the mind of the emperor, before
actively opposing the reform. With the exception of the German Populists
who felt that a German "Liberal" party could not well oppose an extension
of popular rights, all the German Liberals were antagonistic, some
bitterly, to the measure. The Constitutional Landed Proprietors who had
played so large a part in Austrian politics since the 'sixties, and had for
a generation held the leadership of the German element in parliament and in
the country, saw themselves doomed and the leadership of the Germans given
to the Christian Socialists. None of the representatives of the _curia_
system fought so tenaciously for their privileges as did the German
nominees of the _curia_ of large landed proprietors. Their opposition
proved unavailing. The emperor frowned repeatedly upon their efforts.

[Sidenote: Baron Beck premier.]

Baron Gautsch fell in April over a difference with the Poles, and his
successor, Prince Konrad zu Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, who had taken over
the reform bills, resigned also, six weeks later, as a protest against the
action of the crown in consenting to the enactment of a customs tariff in
Hungary distinct from, though identical with, the joint Austro-Hungarian
tariff comprised in the Széll-Körber compact and enacted as a joint tariff
by the Reichsrath. A new cabinet was formed (June 2) by Baron von Beck,
permanent under secretary of state in the ministry for agriculture, an
official of considerable ability who had first acquired prominence as an
instructor of the heir apparent, Archduke Francis Ferdinand, in
constitutional and administrative law. By dint of skilful negotiation with
the various parties and races, and steadily supported by the emperor who,
on one occasion, summoned the recalcitrant party leaders to the Hofburg _ad
audiendum verbum_ and told them the reform "must be accomplished," Baron
Beck succeeded, in October 1906, in attaining a final agreement, and on the
1st of December in securing the adoption of the reform. During the
negotiations the number of constituencies was raised to 516, divided,
according to provinces, as follows:--

  Bohemia   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 130 previously 110
  Galicia   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 106     "       78
  Lower Austria .   .   .   .   .   .   .  64     "       46
  Moravia   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  49     "       43
  Styria.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  30     "       27
  Tirol .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  25     "       21
  Upper Austria .   .   .   .   .   .   .  22     "       20
  Austrian Silesia  .   .   .   .   .   .  15     "       12
  Bukovina  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  14     "       11
  Carniola  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  12     "       11
  Dalmatia  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  11     "       11
  Carinthia .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  10     "       10
  Salzburg  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   7     "        7
  Istria.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   6     "        5
  Görz and Gradisca .   .   .   .   .   .   6     "        5
  Trieste and territory .   .   .   .   .   5     "        5
  Vorarlberg.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   4     "        4

In the allotment of the constituencies to the various races their
tax-paying capacity was taken into consideration. In mixed districts
separate constituencies and registers were established for the electors of
each race, who could only vote on their own register for a candidate of
their own race. Thus Germans were obliged to vote for Germans and Czechs
for Czechs; and, though there might be victories of Clerical over Liberal
Germans or of Czech Radicals over Young Czechs, there could be no victories
of Czechs over Germans, Poles over Ruthenes, or Slovenes over Italians. The
constituencies were divided according to race as follows:--

  Germans of all parties.   .   .   .   . 233 previously 205
  Czechs of all parties .   .   .   .   . 108     "       81
  Poles .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  80     "       71
  Southern Slavs (Slovenes, Croats,
    Serbs)  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  37     "       27
  Ruthenes  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  34     "       11
  Italians  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  19     "       18
  Rumanians .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   5     "        5

These allotments were slightly modified at the polls by the victory of some
Social Democratic candidates not susceptible of strict racial
classification. The chief feature of the allotment was, however, the formal
overthrow of the fiction that Austria is preponderatingly a German country
and not a country preponderatingly Slav with a German dynasty and a German
façade. The German constituencies, though allotted in a proportion unduly
favourable, left the Germans, with 233 seats, in a permanent minority as
compared with the 259 Slav seats. Even with the addition of the "Latin"
(Rumanian and Italian) seats the "German-Latin block" amounted only to 257.
This "block" no longer exists in practice, as the Italians now tend to
co-operate rather with the Slavs than with the Germans. The greatest
gainers by the redistribution were the Ruthenes, whose representation was
trebled, though it is still far from being proportioned to their numbers.
This and other anomalies will doubtless be corrected in future revisions of
the allotment, although the German parties, foreseeing that any revision
must work out to their disadvantage, stipulated that a two-thirds majority
should be necessary for any alteration of the law.

[Sidenote: General election 1907.]

After unsuccessful attempts by the Upper House to introduce plural voting,
the bill became law in January 1907, the peers insisting only upon the
establishment of a fixed _maximum_ number or _numerus clausus_, of
non-hereditary peers, so as to prevent the resistance of the Upper Chamber
from being overwhelmed at any critical moment by an influx of crown
nominees appointed _ad hoc_. The general election which took place amid
considerable enthusiasm on the 14th of May resulted in a sweeping victory
for the Social Democrats whose number rose from 11 to 87; in a less
complete triumph for the Christian Socialists who increased from 27 to 67;
and in the success of the extremer over the conservative elements in all
races. A classification of the groups in the new Chamber presents many
difficulties, but the following statement is approximately accurate. It
must be premised that, in order to render the Christian Socialist or Lueger
party the strongest group in parliament, an amalgamation was effected
between them and the conservative Catholic party:--

  _German Conservatives_--                             Total.
    Christian Socialists.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   96
    German Agrarians.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
  _German Liberals_--
    Progressives.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
    Populists   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   29
    Pan-German radicals (Wolf group).   .   .   .   .   13
    Unattached Pan-Germans  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    3
        "     Progressives  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    2
  _Czechs_--                                            --    177
    Czech Agrarians .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28
    Young Czechs.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18
    Czech Clericals .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
    Old Czechs  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    7
    Czech National Socialists   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
    Realists.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    2
    Unattached Czech.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    1
  _Social Democrats_--                                  --     82
    Of all races.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   87     87
  _Poles_--
    Democrats   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   26
    Conservatives   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
    Populists   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18
    Centre  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
    Independent Socialist   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    1
  _Ruthenes_--                                          --     72
    National Democrats  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25
    Old or Russophil Ruthenes   .   .   .   .   .   .    5
  _Slovenes_--                                          --     30
    Clericals   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
  _Southern Slav Club_--
    Croats  .   .    }
    Serbs   .   .   .}  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20     37
    Slovene Liberals }
  _Italians_--
    Clerical Populists  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
    Liberals.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    4
                                                        --     15
  _Rumanians_--
    Rumanian Club   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    5      5
  _Jews_--
    Zionists.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    4
    Democrats   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    1      5
                                                        --
    Unclassified, vacancies, &c.    .   .   .   .   .    6      6
                                                              ---
                                                              516

[v.03 p.0039] The legislature elected by universal suffrage worked fairly
smoothly during the first year of its existence. The estimates were voted
with regularity, racial animosity was somewhat less prominent, and some
large issues were debated. The desire not to disturb the emperor's Diamond
Jubilee year by untoward scenes doubtless contributed to calm political
passion, and it was celebrated in 1908 with complete success. But it was no
sooner over than the crisis over the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is dealt with above, eclipsed all purely domestic affairs in the
larger European question.

(H. W. S.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--1. _Sources_. A collection of early authorities on Austrian
history was published in 3 vols. folio by Hieronymus Pez (Leipzig,
1721-1725) under the title _Scriptores rerum Austriacarum veteres et
genuini_, of which a new edition was printed at Regensburg in 1745, and
again, under the title of _Rerum Austriacarum scriptores_, by A. Rauch at
Vienna in 1793-1794. It was not, however, till the latter half of the 19th
century that the vast store of public and private archives began to be
systematically exploited. Apart from the material published in the
_Monumenta Germ. Hist_. of Pertz and his collaborators, there are several
collections devoted specially to the sources of Austrian history. Of these
the most notable is the _Fontes rerum Austriacarum_, published under the
auspices of the Historical Commission of the Imperial Academy of Sciences
at Vienna; the series, of which the first volume was published in 1855, is
divided into two parts: (i.) _Scriptores_, of which the 9th vol. appeared
in 1904; (ii.) _Diplomataria et Acta_, of which the 58th vol. appeared in
1906. It covers the whole range of Austrian history, medieval and modern.
Another collection is the _Quellen und Forschungen zur Geschichte,
Literatur und Sprache Österreichs und seiner Kronländer_, edited by J. Hirn
and J. E. Wackernagel (Graz, 1895, &c.), of which vol. x. appeared in 1906.
Besides these there are numerous accounts and inventories of public and
private archives, for which see Dahlmann-Waitz, _Quellenkunde_ (ed. 1906),
pp. 14-15, 43, and suppl. vol. (1907), pp. 4-5. Of collections of treaties
the most notable is that of L. Neumann, _Recueil des traités conclus par
l'Autriche avec les puissances étrangères depuis 1763_ (6 vols., Leipzig,
1855: c.), continued by A. de Plason (18 vols., Vienna, 1877-1905). In
1907, however, the Imperial Commission for the Modern History of Austria
issued the first volume of a new series, _Österreichische Staatsverträge_,
which promises to be of the utmost value. Like the _Recueil des traités
conclus par la Russie_ of T. T. de Martens, it is compiled on the principle
of devoting separate volumes to the treaties entered into with the several
states; this is obviously convenient as enabling the student to obtain a
clear review of the relations of Austria to any particular state throughout
the whole period covered. For treaties see also J. Freiherr von Vasque von
Püttlingen, _Übersicht der österreichischen Staatsverträge seit Maria
Theresa bis auf die neueste Zeit_ (Vienna, 1868); and L. Bittner,
_Chronologisches Verzeichnis der österreichischen Staatsverträge_ (Band G,
1526-1723, Vienna, 1903).

2. _Works_.--(a) _General._ Archdeacon William Coxe's _History of the House
of Austria, 1218-1792_ (3 vols., London, 1817), with its continuation by W.
Kelly (London, 1853; new edition, 1873), remains the only general history
of Austria in the English language. It has, of course, long been superseded
as a result of the research indicated above. The amount of work that has
been devoted to this subject since Coxe's time will be seen from the
following list of books, which are given in the chronological order of
their publication:--J. Majláth, _Geschichte des österreichischen
Kaiserstaates_ (5 vols., Hamburg, 1834-1850); Count F. von Hartig, _Genesis
der Revolution in Österreich im Jahre 1848_ (Leipzig, 1851; 3rd edition,
enlarged, _ib._, 1851; translated as appendix to Coxe's _House of Austria_,
ed. 1853), a work which created a great sensation at the time and remains
of much value; W. H. Stiles, _Austria in 1848-1849_ (2 vols., New York,
1852), by an eye-witness of events; M. Büdinger, _Österreichische Gesch.
bis zum Ausgange des dreizehnten Jahrhunderts_, vol. i. to A.D. 1055
(Leipzig, 1858); A. Springer, _Geschichte Österreichs seit dem Wiener
Frieden_, 1809 (2 vols. to 1849; Leipzig, 1863-1865); A. von Arneth,
_Geschichte Maria Theresias_ (10 vols., Vienna, 1863-1879); the series
_Österreichische Gesch. für das Volk_, 17 vols., by various authors
(Vienna, 1864, &c.), for which see Dahlmann-Waitz, p. 86; H. Bidermann,
_Gesch. der österreichischen Gesamtstaatsidee_, 1526-1804, parts 1 and 2 to
1740 (Innsbruck, 1867, 1887); J. A. Freiherr von Helfert, _Gesch.
Österreichs vom Ausgange des Oktoberaufstandes_, 1848, vols. i.-iv.
(Leipzig and Prague, 1869-1889); W. Rogge, _Österreich von Világos bis zur
Gegenwart_ (3 vols., Leipzig and Vienna, 1872, 1873), and _Österreich seit
der Katastrophe Hohenwart-Beust_ (Leipzig, 1879), written from a somewhat
violent German standpoint; Franz X. Krones (Ritter von Marchland),
_Handbuch der Gesch. Österreichs_ (5 vols., Berlin, 1876-1879), with
copious references, _Gesch. der Neuzeit Österreichs vom 18ten Jahrhundert
bis auf die Gegenwart_ (Berlin, 1879), from the German-liberal point of
view, and _Grundriss der österreichischen Gesch_. (Vienna, 1882); Baron
Henry de Worms, _The Austro-Hungarian Empire_ (London, 2nd ed., 1876);
Louis Asseline, _Histoire de l'Autriche depuis la mort de Marie Thérèse_
(Paris, 1877), sides with the Slavs against Germans and Magyars; Louis
Leger, _Hist. de l'Autriche-Hongrie_ (Paris, 1879), also strongly
Slavophil; A. Wolf, _Geschichtliche Bilder aus Österreich_ (2 vols.,
Vienna, 1878-1880), and _Österreich unter Maria Theresia, Joseph II. und
Leopold I._ (Berlin, 1882); E. Wertheimer, _Gesch. Österreichs und Ungarns
im ersten Jahrzehnt des 19ten Jahrhunderts_ (2 vols., Leipzig, 1884-1890);
A. Huber, _Gesch. Österreichs_, vols. i. to v. up to 1648 (in Heeren's
_Gesch. der europ. Staaten_, Gotha, 1885-1895); J. Emmer, _Kaiser Franz
Joseph I., fünfzig Jahre österreichischer Gesch_. (2 vols., Vienna, 1898);
F. M. Mayer, _Gesch. Österreichs mit besonderer Rücksicht auf das
Kulturleben_ (2 vols. 2nd ed., Vienna, 1900-1901); A. Dopsch, _Forschungen
zur inneren Gesch. Österreichs_, vol. i. 1 (Innsbruck, 1903); Louis
Eisenmann, _Le Compromis austro-hongrois de 1867_ (Paris, 1904); H.
Friedjung, _Österreich von 1848 bis 1860_ (Stuttgart, 1908 seq.); Geoffrey
Drage, _Austria-Hungary_ (London, 1909).

(b) _Constitutional._--E. Werunsky, _Österreichische Reichs- und
Rechtsgeschichte_ (Vienna, 1894, &c.); A. Bechmann, _Lehrbuch der
österreichischen Reichsgesch_. (Prague, 1895-1896); A. Huber,
_Österreichische Reichsgesch_. (Leipzig and Vienna, 1895, 2nd ed. by A.
Dopsch, _ib._, 1901); A. Luschin von Ebengreuth, _Österreichische
Reichsgesch_. (2 vols., Bamberg, 1895, 1896), a work of first-class
importance; and _Grundriss der österreichischen Reichsgesch_. (Bamberg,
1899); G. Kolmer, _Parlament und Verfassung in Österreich_, vols. i. to
iii. from 1848 to 1885 (Vienna, 1902-1905). For relations with Hungary see
J. Andrássy, _Ungarns Ausgleich mit Österreich, 1867_ (Leipzig, 1897); L.
Eisenmann, _Le Compromis austro-hongrois de 1867_ (Paris, 1904).

(c) _Diplomatic._--A. Beer, _Zehn Jahre österreichischer Politik,
1801-1810_ (Leipzig, 1877), and _Die orientalische Politik Österreichs seit
1774_ (Prague and Leipzig, 1883); A. Fournier, _Gentz und Cobenzl: Gesch.
der öst. Politik in den Jahren 1801-1805_ (Vienna, 1880); F. von
Demelitsch, _Metternich und seine auswärtige Politik_, vol. i. (1809-1812,
Stuttgart, 1898); H. Übersberger, _Österreich und Russland seit dem Ende
des 15ten Jahrhunderts_, vol. i. 1488 to 1605 (Kommission für die neuere
Gesch. Österreichs, Vienna, 1905). See further the bibliographies to the
articles on METTERNICH, GENTZ, &c. For the latest developments of the
"Austrian question" see André Chéradame, _L'Europe et la question
d'Autriche au seuil du XX^e siècle_ (Paris, 1901), and _L'Allemagne, la
France et la question d'Autriche_ (76, 1902); René Henry, _Questions
d'Autriche-Hongrie et question d'orient_ (Paris, 1903), with preface by
Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu; "Scotus Viator," _The Future of Austria-Hungary_
(London, 1907).

(d) _Racial Question._--There is a very extensive literature on the
question of languages and race in Austria. The best statement of the legal
questions involved is in Josef Ulbrith and Ernst Mischler's _Österr.
Staatswörterbuch_ (3 vols., Vienna, 1894-1897; 2nd ed. 1904, &c.). See also
Dummreicher, _Südostdeutsche Betrachtungen_ (Leipzig, 1893); Hainisch, _Die
Zukunft der Deutsch-Österreicher_ (Vienna, 1892); Herkner, _Die Zukunft der
Deutsch-Österreicher_ (_ib._ 1893); L. Leger, _La Save, le Danube et le
Balkan_ (Paris, 1884); Bressnitz von Sydacoff, _Die panslavistische
Agitation_ (Berlin, 1899); Bertrand Auerbach, _Les Races et les
nationalités en Autriche-Hongrie_ (Paris, 1898).

(e) _Biographical._--C. von Wurzbach, _Biographisches Lexikon des
Kaisertums Österreich_ (60 vols., Vienna, 1856-1891); also the _Allgemeine
deutsche Biographie_.

Many further authorities, whether works, memoirs or collections of
documents, are referred to in the lists appended to the articles in this
book on the various Austrian sovereigns and statesmen. For full
bibliography see Dahlmann-Waitz, _Quellenkunde_ (ed. 1906, and subsequent
supplements); many works, covering particular periods, are also enumerated
in the bibliographies in the several volumes of the _Cambridge Modern
History_.

(W. A. P.)

[1] Rudolph V. as archduke of Austria, II. as emperor.

[2] Thus, while the number of recruits, though varying from year to year,
could be settled by the war department, the question of the claim of a
single conscript for exemption, on grounds not recognized by precedent,
could only be settled by imperial decree.

[3] Forbidden books were the only ones read, and forbidden newspapers the
only ones believed.

[4] In Hungary the diet was not summoned at all between 1811 and 1825, nor
in Transylvania between 1811 and 1834.

[5] For the separate political histories of Austria and Hungary see the
section on II. _Austria Proper_, below, and HUNGARY; the present section
deals with the history of the whole monarchy as such.

[6] Baron H. de Worms, _The Austro-Hungarian Empire_ (London, 1876), and
Beust's _Memoirs_.

[7] See General Le Brun, _Souvenirs militaires_ (1866-1870, Paris, 1895);
also, Baron de Worms, _op. cit_., and the article on BEUST.

[8] Josef, Freiherr Philippovi['c] von Philippsberg (1818-1889), belonged
to an old Christian noble family of Bosnia.

[9] Sir Charles Dilke, _The Present Position of European Politics_ (London,
1887).

[10] Matlekovits, _Die Zollpolitik der österreichisch-ungarischen
Monarchie_ (Leipzig, 1891), gives the Hungarian point of view; Bazant, _Die
Handelspolitik Österreich-Ungarns_ (1875-1892, Leipzig, 1894).

[11] The only change was that as the military frontier had been given over
to Hungary, Hungary in consequence of this addition of territory had to pay
2%, the remaining 98% being divided as before, so that the real proportion
was 31.4 and 68.6.

[12] Alois, Count Lexa von Aerenthal, was born on the 27th of September
1854 at Gross-Skal in Bohemia, studied at Bonn and Prague, was attaché at
Paris (1877) and afterwards at St Petersburg, envoy extraordinary at
Bucharest (1895) and ambassador at St Petersburg (1896). He was created a
count on the emperor's 79th birthday in 1909.

[13] It is impossible to avoid using the word "Austria" to designate these
territories, though it is probably incorrect. Officially the word "Austria"
is not found, and though the sovereign is emperor of Austria, an Austrian
empire appears not to exist; the territories are spoken of in official
documents as "the kingdoms and lands represented in the Reichsrath." The
Hungarians and the German party in Austria have expressed their desire that
the word Austria should be used, but it has not been gratified. On the
other hand, expressions such as "Austrian citizens," "Austrian law" are
found. The reason of this peculiar use is probably twofold. On the one
hand, a reluctance to confess that Hungary is no longer in any sense a part
of Austria; on the other hand, the refusal of the Czechs to recognize that
their country is part of Austria. Sometimes the word _Erbländer_, which
properly is applied only to the older ancestral dominions of the house of
Habsburg, is used for want of a better word.

[14] The documents are printed in Baron de Worms, _op. cit_.

[15] It is printed in the _Europaischer Geschichtskalender_ (1868).

[16] See Wirth, _Geschichte der Handelskrisen_ (Frankfort, 1885); and an
interesting article by Schäffle in the _Zeitschrift f. Staatswissenschaft_
(Stuttgart, 1874).

[17] For Dalmatia, see T. G. Jackson, _Dalmatia &c._, (Oxford, 1889).

[18] On this see Menger, _Der Ausgleich mit Böhmen_ (Vienna, 1891), where
the documents are printed.