AUTONOMY (Gr. [Greek: autos], self, and [Greek: nomos], law), in general,
freedom from external restraint, self-government. The term is usually
coupled with a qualifying adjective. Thus, political autonomy is
self-government in its widest sense, independence of all control from
without. Local autonomy is a freedom of self-government within a sphere
marked out by some superior authority; _e.g._ municipal corporations in
England have their administrative powers marked out for them by acts of
parliament, and in so far as they govern themselves within these limits
exercise local autonomy. Administrative or constitutional autonomy, such as
exists in the British colonies, implies an extent of self-government which
falls short only of complete independence. The term is used loosely even in
the case of _e.g._ religious bodies, individual churches and other
communities [v.03 p.0049] which enjoy a measure of self-government in
certain specified respects.

In philosophy, the term (with its antithesis "heteronomy") was applied by
Kant to that aspect of the rational will in which, _qua_ rational, it is a
law to itself, independently alike of any external authority, of the
results of experience and of the impulses of pleasure and pain. In the
sphere of morals, the ultimate and only authority which the mind can
recognize is the law which emerges from the pure moral consciousness. This
is the only sense in which moral freedom can be understood. (See ETHICS;
KANT.) Though the term "autonomy" in its fullest sense implies entire
freedom from causal necessity, it can also be used even in determinist
theories for relative independence of particular conditions, theological or
conventional.