AVEBURY, JOHN LUBBOCK, 1ST BARON (1834- ), English banker, politician and
naturalist, was born in London [v.03 p.0052] on the 30th of April 1834, the
son of Sir John William Lubbock, 3rd baronet, himself a highly
distinguished man of science. John Lubbock was sent to Eton in 1845; but
three years later was taken into his father's bank, and became a partner at
twenty-two. In 1865 he succeeded to the baronetcy. His love of science kept
pace with his increasing participation in public affairs. He served on
commissions upon coinage and other financial questions; and at the same
time acted as president of the Entomological Society and of the
Anthropological Institute. Early in his career several banking reforms of
great importance were due to his initiative, while such works as
_Prehistoric Times_ (1865) and _The Origin of Civilization_ (1870) were
proceeding from his pen. In 1870, and again in 1874, he was elected a
member of parliament for Maidstone. He lost the seat at the election of
1880; but was at once elected member for London University, of which he had
been vice-chancellor since 1872. He carried numerous enactments in
parliament, including the Bank Holidays Act 1871, and bills dealing with
absconding debtors, shop hours regulations, public libraries, open spaces,
and the preservation of ancient monuments, and he proved himself an
indefatigable and influential member of the Unionist party. A prominent
supporter of the Statistical Society, he took an active part in criticizing
the encroachment of municipal trading and the increase of the municipal
debt. He was elected the first president of the Institute of Bankers in
1879; in 1881 he was president of the British Association, and from 1881 to
1886 president of the Linnaean Society. He received honorary degrees from
the universities of Oxford, Cambridge (where he was Rede lecturer in 1886),
Edinburgh, Dublin and Würzburg; and in 1878 was appointed a trustee of the
British Museum. From 1888 to 1892 he was president of the London Chamber of
Commerce; from 1889 to 1890 vice-chairman and from 1890 to 1892 chairman of
the London County Council. During the same period he served on royal
commissions on education and on gold and silver. In 1890 he was appointed a
privy councillor; and was chairman of the committee of design on the new
coinage in 1891. In 1900 he was raised to the peerage, under the title of
Baron Avebury, and he continued to play a leading part in public life, not
only by the weight of his authority on many subjects, but by the readiness
with which he lent his support to movements for the public benefit. Among
other matters he was a prominent advocate of proportional representation.
As an original author and a thoughtful popularizer of natural history and
philosophy he had few rivals in his day, as is evidenced by the number of
editions issued of many of his writings, among which the most widely-read
have been: _The Origin and Metamorphoses of Insects_ (1873), _British Wild
Flowers_ (1875), _Ants, Bees and Wasps_ (1882), _Flowers, Fruit and Leaves_
(1886), _The Pleasures of Life_ (1887), _The Senses, Instincts and
Intelligence of Animals_ (1888), _The Beauties of Nature_ (1892), _The Use
of Life_ (1894).