AVEIRO, a seaport, episcopal see, and the capital of an administrative
district, formerly included in the province of Beira, Portugal; on the
river Vouga, and the Lisbon-Oporto railway. Pop. (1900) 9979. Aveiro is
built on the southern shore of a marshy lagoon, containing many small
islands, and measuring about 15 m. from north to south, with an average
breadth of about 1 m. The Barra Nova, an artificial canal about 33 ft.
deep, was constructed between 1801 and 1808, and gives access to the
Atlantic ocean. The local industries include the preparation of sea-salt,
the catching and curing of fish, especially sardines and oysters, and the
gathering of aquatic plants (_moliço_). There is also a brisk trade in
wine, oil and fruit; while the Aveiro district contains copper and lead
mines, besides much good pasture-land.

Aveiro is probably the Roman Talabriga. In the 16th century it was the
birthplace of João Affonso, one of the first navigators to visit the
fishing-grounds of Newfoundland; and it soon became famous for its fleet of
more than sixty vessels, which sailed yearly to that country, and returned
laden with dried codfish. During the same century the cathedral was built,
and the city was made a duchy. The title "duke of Aveiro" became extinct
when its last holder, Dom José Mascarenhas e Lancaster, was burned alive
for high treason, in 1759. The administrative district of Aveiro coincides
with the north-western part of the province of Beira; pop. (1900) 303,169;
area, 1065 sq. m.