AVELLINO, a city and episcopal see of Campania, Italy, the capital of the
province of Avellino, 1150 ft. above sea-level, 28 m. direct and 59 m. by
rail E.N.E. of Naples, at the foot of Monte Vergine. Pop. (1901) 23,760.
There are ruins of the castle constructed in the 9th or 10th century, in
which the antipope Anacletus II. crowned Count Roger II. king of Sicily and
Apulia. Avellino is the junction of lines to Benevento and Rocchetta S.
Antonio. The name is derived from the ancient Abellinum, the ruins of which
lie 2½ m. north-east, close to the village of Atripalda, and consist of
remains of city walls and an amphitheatre in _opus reticulatum_, _i.e._ of
the early imperial period, when Abellinum appears to have been the chief
place of a tribe, to which belonged also the independent communities of the
_Abellinates cognomine Protropi_ among the Hirpini, and the _Abellinates
cognominati Marsi_ among the Apulians (Nissen, _Italische Landeskunde_, ii.
822). It lay on the boundary of Campania and the territory of the Hirpini,
at the junction of the roads from Nola (and perhaps also from Suessula) and
Salernum to Beneventum.

The Monte Vergine (4165 ft.) lies 4 m. to the N.W. of Avellino; upon the
summit is a sanctuary of the Virgin, founded in 1119, which contains a
miraculous picture attributed to S. Luke (the greatest festival is on the
8th of September). The present church is baroque in style, but contains
some works of art of earlier periods. The important archives have been
transported to Naples.

(T. AS.)