AVEMPACE [Abu Bakr Mu[h.]ammad ibn Ya[h.]ya, known as Ibn B[=a]jja or Ibn
[S.]a`igh, _i.e._ son of the goldsmith, the name being corrupted by the
Latins into Avempace, Avenpace or Aben Pace], the earliest and one of the
most distinguished of the Arab philosophers of Spain. Little is known of
the details of his life. He was born probably at Saragossa towards the
close of the 11th century. According to Ibn Kh[=a]q[=a]n, a contemporary
writer, he became a student of the exact sciences and was also a musician
and a poet. But he was a philosopher as well, and apparently a sceptic. He
is said to have rejected the Koran, to have denied the return to God, and
to have regarded death as the end of existence. But even in that orthodox
age he became vizier to the amir of Murcia. Afterwards he went to Valencia,
then to Saragossa. After the fall of Saragossa (1119) he went to Seville,
then to Xativa, where he is said to have returned to Islam to save his
life. Finally he retired to the Almoravid court at Fez, where he was
poisoned in 1138. Ibn `Usaibi`a gives a list of twenty-five of his works,
but few of these remain. He had a distinct influence upon Averroes (see
ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY).

For his life see McG. de Slane's trans. of Ibn Khallik[=a]n's _Biographical
Dictionary_ (Paris and London, 1842), vol. iii. pp. 130 ff., and Ibn
`Usaibi`a's biography translated in P. de Gayangos' edition of the _History
of the Mohammedan Dynasties in Spain_, by al-Maqqari (London, 1840), vol.
ii., appendix, p. xii. List of extant works in C. Brockelmann's _Geschichte
der arabischen Litteratur_, vol. i. p. 460. For his philosophy cf. T. J. de
Boer's _The History of Philosophy in Isl[=a]m_ (London, 1903), ch. vi.

(G. W. T.)