AVENZOAR, or ABUMERON [Ab[=u] Merw[=a]n `Abdal-Malik ibn Zuhr], Arabian
physician, who flourished at the beginning of the 12th century, was born at
Seville, where he exercised his profession with great reputation. His
ancestors had been celebrated as physicians for several generations, and
his son was afterwards held by the Arabians to be even more eminent in his
profession than Avenzoar himself. He was a contemporary of Averroes, who,
according to Leo Africanus, heard his lectures, and learned physic of him.
He belonged, in many respects, to the _Dogmatists_ or _Rational School_,
rather than to the _Empirics_. He was a great admirer of Galen; and in his
writings he protests emphatically against quackery and the superstitious
remedies of the astrologers. He shows no inconsiderable knowledge of
anatomy in his remarkable description of inflammation and abscess of the
mediastinum in his own person, and its diagnosis from common pleuritis as
well as from abscess and dropsy of the pericardium. In cases of obstruction
or of palsy of the gullet, his three modes of treatment are ingenious. He
proposes to support the strength by placing the patient in a tepid bath of
nutritious liquids, that might enter by cutaneous imbibition, but does not
recommend this. He speaks more favourably of the introduction of food into
the stomach by a silver tube; and he strongly recommends the use of
nutritive enemata. From his writings it would appear that the offices of
physician, surgeon and apothecary were already considered as distinct
professions. He wrote a book entitled _The Method of Preparing Medicines
and Diet_, which was translated into Hebrew in the year 1280, and thence
into Latin by Paravicius, whose version, first printed at Venice, 1490, has
passed through several editions.