AVERROES [Ab[=u]l-Wal[=i]d Mu[h.]ammad ibn-A[h.]mad Ibn-Mu[h.]ammad
ibn-Rushd] (1126-1198), Arabian philosopher, was born at Cordova. His early
life was occupied in mastering the curriculum of theology, jurisprudence,
mathematics, medicine and philosophy, under the approved teachers of the
time. The years of his prime fell during the last period of Mahommedan rule
in Spain under the Almohades (_q.v._). It was Ibn-Tufail (Abubacer), the
philosophic vizier of Yusef, who introduced Averroes to that prince, and
Avenzoar (Ibn-Zuhr), the greatest of Moslem physicians, was his friend.
Averroes, who was versed in the Malekite system of law, was made cadi of
Seville (1169), and in similar appointments the next twenty-five years of
his life were passed. We find him at different periods in Seville, Cordova
and Morocco, probably as physician to Yusef al-Mansur, who took pleasure in
engaging him in discussions on the theories of philosophy and their
bearings on the faith of Islam. But science and free thought then, as now,
in Islam, depended almost solely on the tastes of the wealthy and the
favour of the monarch. The ignorant fanaticism of the multitude viewed
speculative studies with deep dislike and distrust, and deemed any one a
Zendik (infidel) who did not rest content with the natural science of the
Koran. These smouldering hatreds burst into open flame about the year 1195.
Averroes was accused of heretical opinions and pursuits, stripped of his
honours, and banished to a place near Cordova, where his actions were
closely watched. At the same time efforts were made to stamp out all
liberal culture in Andalusia, so far as it went beyond the little medicine,
arithmetic and astronomy required for practical life. But the storm soon
passed. Averroes was recalled to Morocco when the transient passion of the
people had been satisfied, and for a brief period survived his restoration
to honour. He died in the year before his patron, al-Mansur, with whom (in
1199) the political power of the Moslems came to an end, as did the culture
of liberal science with Averroes. The philosopher left several sons, some
of whom became jurists like his own grandfather. One of them has left an
essay, expounding his father's theory of the intellect. The personal
character of Averroes is known to us only in a general way, and as we can
gather it from his writings. His clear, exhaustive and dignified style of
treatment evidences the rectitude and nobility of the man. In the histories
of his own nation he has little place; the renown which spread in his
lifetime to the East ceased with his death, and he left no school. Yet,
from a note in a manuscript, we know that he had intelligent readers in
Spain more than a century afterwards. His historic fame came from the
Christian Schoolmen, whom he almost initiated into the system of Aristotle,
and who, but vaguely discerning the expositors who preceded, admired in his
commentaries the accumulated results of two centuries of labours.

The literary works of Averroes include treatises on jurisprudence, grammar,
astronomy, medicine and philosophy. In 1859 a work of Averroes was for the
first time published in Arabic by the Bavarian Academy, and a German
translation appeared in 1873 by the editor, J. Müller. It is a treatise
entitled _Philosophy and Theology_, and, with the exception of a German
version of the essay on the conjunction of the intellect with man, is the
first translation which enables the non-Semitic scholar to form any
adequate idea of Averroes. The Latin translations of most of his works are
barbarous and obscure. A great part of his writings, particularly on
jurisprudence and astronomy, as well as essays on special logical subjects,
prolegomena to philosophy, criticisms on Avicenna and Alfarabius
(F[=a]r[=a]b[=i]), remain in manuscript in the Escorial and other
libraries. The Latin editions of his medical works include the _Colliget_
(_i.e._ _Kulliyyat_, or summary), a _résumé_ of medical science, and a
commentary on Avicenna's poem on medicine; but Averroes, in medical renown,
always stood far below Avicenna. The Latin editions of his philosophical
works comprise the _Commentaries on Aristotle_, the _Destructio
Destructionis_ (against Ghaz[=a]li), the _De Substantia Orbis_ and a double
treatise _De Animae Beatitudine_. The Commentaries of Averroes fall under
three heads:--the larger commentaries, in which a paragraph is quoted at
large, and its clauses expounded one by one; the medium commentaries, which
cite only the first words of a section; and the paraphrases or analyses,
treatises on the subjects of the Aristotelian books. The larger commentary
was an innovation of Averroes; for Avicenna, copied by Albertus Magnus,
gave under the rubrics furnished by Aristotle works in which, though the
materials were borrowed, the grouping was his own. The great commentaries
exist only for the _Posterior Analytics_, _Physics_, _De Caelo_, _De Anima_
and _Metaphysics_. On the _History of Animals_ no commentary at all exists,
and Plato's _Republic_ is substituted for the then inaccessible _Politics_.
The Latin editions of these works between 1480 and 1580 number about 100.
The first [v.03 p.0059] appeared at Padua (1472); about fifty were
published at Venice, the best-known being that by the Juntas (1552-1553) in
ten volumes folio.

See E. Renan, _Averroès et l'Averroïsme_ (2nd ed., Paris, 1861); S. Munk,
_Mélanges_, 418-458; G. Stöckl, _Phil. d. Mittelalters_, ii. 67-124;
_Averroes (Vater und Sohn), Drei Abhandl. über d. Conjunction d. separaten
Intellects mit d. Menschen_, trans. into German from the Arabic version of
Sam. Ben-Tibbon, by Dr J. Hercz (Berlin, 1869); T. J. de Boer, _History of
Philosophy in Islam_ (London, 1903), ch. vi.; A. F. M. Mehren in _Muséon_,
vii. 613-627; viii. 1-20; Carl Brockelmann, _Geschichte der arabischen
Litteratur_ (Weimar, 1898), vol. i. pp. 461 f. See also ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY.

(W. W.; G. W. T.)