AVLONA (anc. _Aulon_; Ital. _Valona_; Alb. _Vliona_), a town and seaport of
Albania, Turkey, in the vilayet of Iannina. Pop. (1900) about 6000. Avlona
occupies an eminence near the Gulf of Avlona, an inlet of the Adriatic,
almost surrounded by mountains. The port is the best on the Albanian coast,
and the nearest to Italy. It is protected by the island of Saseno, the
ancient Saso, and by Cape Glossa, the northernmost headland of the
Acroceraunian mountains. It is regularly visited by steamers from Trieste,
Fiume, Brindisi, and other Austro-Hungarian and Italian ports, as well as
by many small Greek and Turkish coasters. The cable and telegraph line from
Otranto, in Italy, to Constantinople, has an important station here. The
town is about 1½ m. from the sea, and has rather a pleasant appearance with
its minarets and its palace, surrounded with gardens and olive-groves.
Valonia, a material largely used by tanners, is the pericarp of an acorn
obtained in the neighbouring oak-woods, and derives its name from Valona.
The surrounding district is mainly agricultural and pastoral, producing
oats, maize, cotton, olive oil, cattle, sheep, skins, hides and butter. All
these commodities are exported in considerable quantities, besides bitumen,
which is obtained from a mine worked by a French [v.03 p.0066] company. The
imports are woollen and cotton piece-goods, metals and petroleum.

Avlona played an important part in the wars between the Normans and the
Byzantines, during the 11th and 12th centuries. In 1464 it was taken by the
Ottomans; and after being in Venetian possession in 1690, was restored to
them in 1691. In 1851 it suffered severely from an earthquake.