AVON, the name of several rivers in England and elsewhere. The word is
Celtic, appearing in Welsh (very frequently) as _afon_, in Manx as _aon_,
and in Gaelic as _abhuinn_ (pronounced _avain_), and is radically identical
with the Sanskrit _ap_, water, and the Lat. _aqua_ and _amnis_. The root
appears more or less disguised in a vast number of river names all over the
Celtic area in Europe. Thus, besides such forms as _Evan_, _Aune_, _Anne_,
_Ive_, _Auney_, _Inney,_ &c., in the British Islands, _Aff_, _Aven_,
_Avon_, _Aune_ appear in Brittany and elsewhere in France, _Avenza_ and
_Avens_ in Italy, _Avia_ in Portugal, and _Avono_ in Spain; while the
terminal syllable of a large proportion of the Latinized names of French
rivers, such as the _Sequana_, the _Matrona_ and the _Garumna_, seems
originally to have been the same word. The names Punj_ab_, Do_ab_, &c.,
show the root in a clearer shape.

In England the following are the principal rivers of this name.

1. The EAST or HAMPSHIRE AVON rises in Wiltshire south of Marlborough, and
watering the Vale of Pewsey collects feeders from the high downs between
Marlborough and Devizes. Breaching the high ground of Salisbury Plain, it
passes Amesbury, and following a very sinuous course reaches Salisbury.
Here it receives on the east bank the waters of the Bourne, and on the west
those of the Wylye. With a more direct course, and in a widening, fertile
valley it continues past Downton, Fordingbridge and Ringwood, skirting the
New Forest on the west, to Christchurch, where it receives the Stour from
the west, and 2½ m. lower enters the English Channel through the broad but
narrow-mouthed Christchurch harbour. The length, excluding lesser
sinuosities, is about 60 m., Salisbury being 35 m. above the mouth. The
total fall is rather over 500 ft., and that from Salisbury about 140 ft.
The river is of no commercial value for navigation. It abounds in loach,
and there are valuable salmon fisheries. The drainage area is 1132 sq. m.

2. The LOWER or BRISTOL AVON rises on the eastern slope of the Cotteswold
Hills in Gloucestershire, collecting the waters of several streams south of
Tetbury and east of Malmesbury. It flows east and south in a wide curve,
through a broad upper valley past Chippenham and Melksham, after which it
turns abruptly west to Bradford-on-Avon, receives the waters of the Frome
from the south, and enters the beautiful narrow valley in which lie Bath
and Bristol. Below Bristol the valley becomes the Clifton Gorge, famous for
its wooded cliffs and for the Clifton (_q.v._) suspension bridge which
bestrides it. The cliffs and woods have been so far disfigured by quarries
that public feeling was aroused, and in 1904 an "Avon Gorge Committee" was
appointed to report to the corporation of Bristol on the possibility of
preserving the beauties of the locality. The Avon finally enters the
estuary of the Severn at Avonmouth, though it can hardly be reckoned as a
tributary of that river. From Bristol downward the river is one of the most
important commercial waterways in England, as giving access to that great
port. The Kennet and Avon Canal, between Reading and the Avon, follows the
river closely from Bradford down to Bath, where it enters it by a descent
of seven locks. The length of the river, excluding minor sinuosities, is
about 75 m., the distance from Bradford to Bath being 10 m., thence to
Bristol 12 m., and thence to the mouth 8 m. The total fall is between 500
and 600 ft., but it is only 235 ft. from Malmesbury. The drainage area is
891 sq. miles.

3. The UPPER AVON, also called the Warwickshire, and sometimes the
"Shakespeare" Avon from its associations with the poet's town of Stratford
on its banks, is an eastern tributary of the Severn. It rises near Naseby
in Northamptonshire, and, with a course of about 100 m. joins the Severn
immediately below Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire. Its early course is
south-westerly to Rugby, thereafter it runs west and south-west to Warwick,
receiving the Leam on the east. Its general direction thereafter remains
south-westerly, and it flows past Stratford-on-Avon, receives the Stour on
the south and the Arrow on the north and thence past Evesham and Pershore
to Tewkesbury. The valley is always broad, and especially from Warwick
downward, through the Vale of Evesham, the scenery is very beautiful, the
rich valley being flanked by the bold Cotteswold Hills on [v.03 p.0067] the
south and by the wooded slopes of the Arden district of Warwickshire on the
north. The view of Warwick Castle, rising from the wooded banks of the
river, is unsurpassed, and the positions of Stratford and Evesham are
admirable. The river is locked, and carries a small trade up to Evesham, 28
m. from Tewkesbury; the locks from Evesham upward to Stratford (17 m.) are
decayed, but the weirs, and mill-dams still higher, afford many navigable
reaches to pleasure boats. The total fall of the river is about 500 ft.;
from Rugby about 230 ft., and from Warwick 120 ft. The river abounds in
coarse fish.

Among other occurrences of the name of Avon in Great Britain there may be
noted--in England, a stream flowing south-east from Dartmoor in Devonshire
to the English Channel; in South Wales, the stream which has its mouth at
Aberavon in Glamorganshire; in Scotland, tributaries of the Clyde, the Spey
and the Forth.