AXHOLME, an island in the north-west part of Lincolnshire, England, lying
between the rivers Trent, Idle and Don, and isolated by drainage channels
connected with these rivers. It consists mainly of a plateau of slight
elevation, rarely exceeding 100 ft., and comprises the parishes of
Althorpe, Belton, Epworth, Haxey, Luddington, Owston and Crowle; the total
area being about 47,000 acres. At a very early period it would appear to
have been covered with forest; but this having been in great measure
destroyed, it became in great part a swamp. In 1627 King Charles I., who
was lord of the island, entered into a contract with Cornelius Vermuyden, a
Dutchman, for reclaiming the meres and marshes, and rendering them fit for
tillage. This undertaking led to the introduction of a large number of
Flemish workmen, who settled in the district, and, in spite of the violent
measures adopted by the English peasantry to expel them, retained their
ground in sufficient numbers to affect the physical appearance and the
accent of the inhabitants to this day. The principal towns in the isle are
Crowle (pop. 2769) and Epworth. The Axholme joint light railway runs north
and south through the isle, connecting Goole with Haxey junction; and the
Great Northern, Great Eastern and Great Central lines also afford
communications. The land is extremely fertile. The name, properly Axeyholm
(cf. Haxey), is hybrid, _Ax_ being the Celtic _uisg_, water; _ey_ the
Anglo-Saxon for island; and _holm_ the Norse word with the same
signification.