AXIOM (Gr. [Greek: axiôma]), a general proposition or principle accepted as
self-evident, either absolutely or within a particular sphere of thought.
Each special science has its own axioms (cf. the Aristotelian [Greek:
archai], "first principles") which, however, are sometimes susceptible of
proof in another wider science. The Greek word was probably confined by
Plato to mathematical axioms, but Aristotle (_Anal. Post._ i. 2) gave it
also the wider significance of the ultimate principles of thought which are
behind all special sciences (_e.g._ the principle of contradiction). These
are apprehended solely by the mind, which may, however, be led to them by
an inductive process. After Aristotle, the term was used by the Stoics and
the school of Ramus for a proposition simply, and Bacon (_Nov. Organ._ i.
7) used it of any general proposition. The word was reintroduced in modern
philosophy probably by René Descartes (or by his followers) who, in the
search for a definite self-evident principle as the basis of a new
philosophy, naturally turned to the familiar science of mathematics. The
axiom of Cartesianism is, therefore, the _Cogito ergo sum_. Kant still
further narrowed the meaning to include only self-evident (intuitive)
synthetic propositions, _i.e._ of space and time. The nature of axiomatic
certainty is part of the fundamental problem of logic and metaphysics.
Those who deny the possibility of all non-empirical knowledge naturally
hold that every axiom is ultimately based on observation. For the Euclidian
axioms see GEOMETRY.