AYALA, DON PEDRO LOPEZ DE (1332-1407), Spanish statesman, historian and
poet, was born at Vittoria in 1332. He first came into prominence at the
court of Peter the Cruel, whose cause he finally deserted; he greatly
distinguished himself in subsequent campaigns, during which he was twice
made prisoner, by the Black Prince at Nájera (1367) and by the Portuguese
at Aljubarrota (1385). A favourite of Henry II. and John I. of Castile, he
was made grand chancellor of the realm by Henry III. in 1398. A brave
officer and an able diplomat, Ayala was one of the most cultivated
Spaniards of his time, at once historian, translator and poet. Of his many
works the most important are his chronicles of the four kings of Castile
during whose reigns he lived; they give a generally accurate account of
scenes and events, most of which he had witnessed; he also wrote a long
satirical and didactic poem, interesting as a picture of his personal
experiences and of contemporary morality. The first part of his chronicle,
covering only the reign of Peter the Cruel, was printed at Seville in 1495;
the first complete edition was printed in 1779-1780 in the collection of
_Crónicas Españolas_, under the auspices of the Spanish Royal Academy of
History. Ayala died at Calahorra in 1407.

See Rafael Floranes, "Vida literaria de Pedro Lopez de Ayala," in the
_Documentos inéditos para la historia de España_, vols. xix. and xx.; F. W.
Schirrmacher, "Über die Glaubwurdigkeit der Chronik Ayalas," in _Geschichte
von Spanien_ (Berlin, 1902), vol. v. pp. 510-532.