AYLESFORD, HENEAGE FINCH, 1st EARL OF (_c._ 1640-1719), 2nd son of Heneage
Finch, 1st earl of Nottingham, was educated at Westminster school and at
Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on the 18th of November 1664.
In 1673 he became a barrister of the Inner Temple; king's counsel and
bencher in 1677; and in 1679, during the chancellorship of his father, was
appointed solicitor-general, being returned to parliament for Oxford
University, and in 1685 for Guildford. In 1682 he represented the crown in
the attack upon the corporation of London, and next year in the prosecution
of Lord Russell, when, according to Burnet, "and in several other trials
afterwards, he showed more of a vicious eloquence in turning matters with
some subtlety against the prisoners than of strict or sincere
reasoning."[1] He does not, however, appear to have exceeded the duties of
prosecutor for the crown as they were then understood. In 1684, in the
trial of Algernon Sidney, he argued that the unpublished treatise of the
accused was an overt act, and supported the opinion of Jeffreys that
_scribere est agere_.[2] The same year he was counsel for James in his
successful action against Titus Oates for libel, and in 1685 prosecuted
Oates for the crown for perjury. Finch, however, though a Tory and a crown
lawyer, was a staunch churchman, and on his refusal in 1686 to defend the
royal dispensing power he was summarily dismissed by James, He was the
leading counsel in June 1688 for the seven bishops, when he "strangely
exposed and very boldly ran down"[3] the dispensing power, but his mistaken
tactics were nearly the cause of his clients losing their case.[4] He sat
again for Oxford University in the convention parliament, which
constituency he represented in all the following assemblies except that of
1698, till his elevation to the peerage. He was, however, no supporter of
the House of Orange, advocated a regency in James's name, and was one of
the few who in the House of Commons opposed the famous vote that James had
broken the contract between king and people and left the throne vacant. He
held no office during William's reign, and is described by Macky as "always
a great opposer" of the administration. In 1689 he joined in voting for the
reversal of Lord Russell's attainder, and endeavoured to defend his conduct
in the trial, but was refused a hearing by the House. He opposed the
Triennial Bill of 1692, but in 1696 spoke against the bill of association
and test, which was voted for the king's protection, on the ground that
though William was to be obeyed as sovereign he could not be acknowledged
"rightful and lawful king." In 1694 he argued against the crown in the
bankers' case. In 1703 he was created baron of Guernsey and a privy
councillor, and after the accession of George I. on the 19th of October
1714, earl of Aylesford, being reappointed a privy councillor and made
chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, which office he retained till
February 1716. He died on the 22nd of July 1719. According to John Macky
(_Memoirs_, p. 71; published by Roxburghe Club, 1895) he was accounted "one
of the greatest orators in England and a good common lawyer; a firm
asserter of the prerogative of the crown and jurisdiction of the church; a
tall, thin, black man, splenatick." He married Elizabeth, daughter and
co-heiress of Sir John Banks of Aylesford, by whom, besides six daughters,
he had three sons, of whom the eldest, Heneage, succeeded him as 2nd earl
of Aylesford. The 2nd earl died in 1757, and since this date the earldom
has been held by his direct descendants, six of whom in succession have
borne the Christian name of Heneage.

Many of his legal arguments are printed in _State Trials_ (see esp. viii.
694, 1087, ix. 625, 880, 996, x. 126, 319, 405, 1199, xii. 183, 353, 365).
Wood attributes to him on the faith of common rumour the authorship of _An
Antidote against Poison ... Remarks upon a Paper printed by Lady (Rachel)
Russel_ (1683), ascribed in _State Trials_ (ix. 710) to Sir Bartholomew
Shower; but see the latter's allusion to it on p. 753.

[1] _Hist. of His Own Times_, i. 556. Swift has appended a note, "an arrant
rascal," but Finch's great offence with the dean was probably his
advancement by George I. rather than his conduct of state trials as here
described.

[2] _Ibid_. 572, and Speaker Onslow's note.

[3] N. Luttrell's _Relation_, i. 447.

[4] _State Trials_, xii. 353.

[v.03 p.0073] AYLESFORD, a town in the Medway parliamentary division of
Kent, England, 3½ m. N.W. of Maidstone on the South-Eastern & Chatham
railway. Pop. (1901) 2678. It stands at the base of a hill on the right
bank of the Medway. The ancient church of St. Peter (restored in 1878) is
principally Perpendicular, but contains some Norman and Decorated portions.
It has interesting brasses of the 15th and 16th centuries and an early
embattled tower. At a short distance west, a residence occupying part of
the site, are remains of a Carmelite friary, founded here in 1240. It is
claimed for this foundation (but not with certainty) that it was the first
house of Carmelites established in England, and the first general chapter
of the order was held here in 1245. Several remains of antiquity exist in
the neighbourhood, among them a cromlech called Kit's Coty House, about a
mile north-east from the village. (See STONE MONUMENTS, Plate, fig. 2.) In
accordance with tradition this has been thought to mark the burial-place of
Catigern, who was slain here in a battle between the Britons and Saxons in
A.D. 455; the name has also been derived from Celtic _Ked-coit_, that is,
the tomb in the wood. The name of the larger group of monuments close by,
called the Countless Stones, is due to the popular belief, which occurs
elsewhere, that they are not to be counted. Large numbers of British coins
have been found in the neighbourhood. The supposed tomb of Horsa, who fell
in the same battle, is situated at Horsted, about 2 m. to the north.