AYLMER, JOHN (1521-1594), English divine, was born in the year 1521 at
Aylmer Hall, Tivetshall St Mary, Norfolk. While still a boy, his precocity
was noticed by Henry Grey, marquis of Dorset, afterwards duke of Suffolk,
who sent him to Cambridge, where he seems to have become a fellow of
Queens' College. About 1541 he was made chaplain to the duke, and tutor to
his daughter, Lady Jane Grey. His first preferment was to the archdeaconry
of Stow, in the diocese of Lincoln, but his opposition in convocation to
the doctrine of transubstantiation led to his deprivation and to his flight
into Switzerland. While there he wrote a reply to John Knox's famous _Blast
against the Monstrous Regiment of Women_, under the title of _An Harborowe
for Faithfull and Trewe Subjects, &c._, and assisted John Foxe in
translating the _Acts of the Martyrs_ into Latin. On the accession of
Elizabeth he returned to England. In 1559 he resumed the Stow archdeaconry,
and in 1562 he obtained that of Lincoln. He was a member of the famous
convocation of 1562, which reformed and settled the doctrine and discipline
of the Church of England. In 1576 he was consecrated bishop of London, and
while in that position made himself notorious by his harsh treatment of all
who differed from him on ecclesiastical questions, whether Puritan or
Papist. Various efforts were made to remove him to another see. He is
frequently assailed in the famous _Marprelate Tracts_, and is characterized
as "Morrell," the bad shepherd, in Spenser's _Shepheard's Calendar_ (July).
His reputation as a scholar hardly balances his inadequacy as a bishop in
the transition time in which he lived. He died in June 1594. His Life was
written by John Strype (1701).