AYRER, JAKOB (?-1605), German dramatist, of whose life little is known. He
seems to have come to Nuremberg as a boy and worked his way up to the
position of imperial notary. He died at Nuremberg on the 26th of March
1605. Besides a rhymed _Chronik der Stadt Bamberg_ (edited by J. Heller,
Bamberg, 1838), and an unpublished translation of the Psalms, Ayrer has
left a large number of dramas which were printed at Nuremberg under the
title _Opus Theatricum_ in 1618. This collection contains thirty tragedies
and comedies and thirty-six _Fastnachtsspiele_ (Shrovetide plays) and
_Singspiele_. As a dramatist, Ayrer is virtually the successor of Hans
Sachs (_q.v._), but he came under the influence of the so-called _Englische
Komödianten_, that is, troupes of English actors, who, at the close of the
16th century and during the 17th, repeatedly visited the continent,
bringing with them the repertory of the Elizabethan theatre. From those
actors Ayrer learned how to enliven his dramas with sensational incidents
and spectacular effects, and from them he borrowed the character of the
clown. His plays, however, are in spite of his foreign models, hardly more
dramatic, in the true sense of the word, than those of Hans Sachs, and they
are inferior to the latter in poetic qualities. The plots of two of his
comedies, _Von der schönen Phoenicia_ and _Von der schönen Sidea_, were
evidently drawn from the same sources as those of Shakespeare's _Much Ado
about Nothing_ and _Tempest_.

_Ayrers Dramen_, edited by A. von Keller, have been published by the
Stuttgart Lit. Verein (1864-1865). See also L. Tieck, _Deutsches Theater_
(1817); A. Cohn, _Shakespeare in Germany_ (1885), which contains a
translation of the two plays mentioned above; J. Tittmann, _Schauspiele des
sechzehnten Jahrhunderts_ (1888).