AYUTHIA, a city of Siam, now known to the Siamese as _Krung Kao_ or "the
Old Capital," situated in 100° 32' E., 14° 21' N. Pop. about 10,000. The
river Me Nam, broken up into a network of creeks, here surrounds a large
island upon which stand the ruins of the famous city which was for more
than four centuries the capital of Siam. The bulk of the inhabitants live
in the floating houses characteristic of lower Siam, using as thoroughfares
the creeks to the edges of which the houses are moored. The ruins of the
old city are of great archaeological interest, as are the relics, of which
a large collection is housed in the local museum. Outside the town is an
ancient masonry enclosure for the capture of elephants, which is still
periodically used. Ayuthia is on the northern main line of the state
railways, 42 m. from Bangkok. Great quantities of paddi are annually sent
by river and rail to Bangkok, in return for which cloth and other goods are
imported to supply the wants of the agriculturist peasantry. There is no
other trade. Ayuthia is the chief town of one of the richest agricultural
provincial divisions of Siam and is the headquarters of a high
commissioner. The government offices occupy spacious buildings, once a
royal summer retreat; the government is that of an ordinary provincial
division (_Monton_).

Historically Ayuthia is the most interesting spot in Siam. Among the
innumerable ruins may be seen those of palaces, pagodas, churches and
fortifications, the departed glories of which are recorded in the writings
of the early European travellers who first brought Siam within the
knowledge of the West, and laid the foundations of the present foreign
intercourse and trade. The town was twice destroyed by the Burmese, once in
1555 and again in 1767, and from the date of the second destruction it
ceased to be the capital of the country.