AZARIAH, the name of several persons mentioned in the Old Testament. (1)
One of Solomon's "princes," son of Zadok the priest (1 Kings iv. 2), was
one of several Azariahs among the descendants of Levi (1 Chron. vi. 9, 10,
13, 36; 2 Chron. xxvi. 17). (2) The son of Nathan, a high official under
King Solomon (1 Kings iv. 5). (3) King of Judah, son of Amaziah by his wife
Jecholiah (2 Kings xv. 1, 2), also called Uzziah (2 Chron. xxvi. 1). (4)
Son of Ethan and great-grandson of Judah (1 Chron. ii. 8). (5) Son of Jehu,
of the posterity of Judah (1 Chron. ii. 38). (6) A prophet in the reign of
Asa, king of Judah (2 Chron. xv. 1). (7) Two sons of Jehoshaphat, king of
Judah (2 Chron. xxi. 2). (8) King of Judah, also called Ahaziah and
Jehoahaz, son of Jehoram (2 Chron. xxi. 17; xxii. 1, 6). (9) The son of
Jeroham, and (10) the son of Obed, were made "captains of hundreds" by
Jehoiada the priest (2 Chron. xxiii. 1). (11) Son of Hilkiah and
grandfather of Ezra the Scribe (Ezra vii. 1; Neh. vii. 7, viii. 7, x. 2).
(12) Son of Maaseiah, one of those who under the commission of Artaxerxes
restored the wall of Jerusalem (Neh. iii. 23). (13) Son of Hoshaiah, an
opponent of the prophet Jeremiah (Jer. xliii. 2). (14) One of the
companions in captivity of the prophet Daniel, called Abednego by
Nebuchadrezzar, by whom with two companions he was cast into a "burning
fiery furnace" for refusing to worship the golden image set up by that
monarch (Dan. i. 6, iii. 8-30).