AZO COMPOUNDS, organic substances of the type R·N:N·R' (where R = an aryl
radical and R' = a substituted alkyl, or aryl radical). They may be
prepared by the reduction of nitro compounds in alkaline solution (using
zinc dust and alkali, or a solution of an alkaline stannite as a reducing
agent); by oxidation of hydrazo compounds; or by the coupling of a
diazotized amine and any compound of a phenolic or aminic type, provided
that there is a free para position in the amine or phenol. They may also be
obtained by the molecular rearrangement of the diazoamines, when these are
warmed with the parent base and its hydrochloride. This latter method of
formation has been studied by H. Goldschmidt and R. U. Reinders (_Ber_.,
1896, 29, p. 1369), who found that the reaction is monomolecular, and that
the velocity constant of the reaction is proportional to the amount of the
hydrochloride of the base present and also to the temperature, but is
independent of the concentration of the diazoamine. The azo compounds are
intensely coloured, but are not capable of being used as dyestuffs unless
they contain salt-forming, acid or basic groups (see DYEING). By oxidizing
agents they are converted into azoxy compounds, and by reducing agents into
hydrazo compounds or amines.

_Azo-benzene_, C_6H_5N:NC_6H_5, discovered by E. Mitscherlich in 1834, may
be prepared by reducing nitrobenzene in alcoholic solution with zinc dust
and caustic soda; by the condensation of nitrosobenzene with aniline in hot
glacial acetic acid solution; or by the oxidation of aniline with sodium
hypobromite. It crystallizes from alcohol in orange red plates which melt
at 68° C. and boil at 293° C. It does not react with acids or alkalis, but
on reduction with zinc dust in acetic acid solution yields aniline.

_Amino-azo Compounds_ may be prepared as shown above. They are usually
yellowish brown or red in colour, the presence of more amino groups leading
to browner shades, whilst the introduction of alkylated amino groups gives
redder shades. They usually crystallize well and are readily reduced. When
heated with aniline and aniline hydrochloride they yield indulines
(_q.v._). Amino-azo-benzene, C_6H_5·N_2·C_6H_4NH_2, crystallizes in yellow
plates or needles and melts at 126° C. Its constitution is determined by
the facts that it may be prepared by reducing nitro-azo-benzene by ammonium
sulphide and that by reduction with stannous chloride it yields aniline and
meta-phenylene diamine. Diamino-azo-benzene (chrysoidine),
C_6H_5·N_2·C_6H_3(NH_2)_2, first prepared by O. Witt (_Ber._, 1877, 10, p.
656), is obtained by coupling phenyl diazonium chloride with meta-phenylene
diamine. It crystallizes in red octahedra and dyes silk and wool yellow.
Triamino-azo-benzene (meta-aminobenzene-azo-meta-phenylene diamine or
Bismarck brown, phenylene brown, vesuvine, Manchester brown),
NH_2·C_6H_4·N_2·C_6H_3(NH_2)_2, is prepared by the action of nitrous acid
on meta-phenylene diamine. It forms brown crystals which are readily
soluble in hot water, and it dyes mordanted cotton a dark brown. On the
composition of the commercial Bismarck brown see E. Tauber and F. Walder
(_Ber_., 1897, 30, pp. 2111, 2899; 1900, 33, p. 2116). Alkylated
amino-azo-benzenes are also known, and are formed by the coupling of
diazonium salts with alkylated amines, provided they contain a free para
position with respect to the amino group. In these cases it has been shown
by H. Goldschmidt and A. Merz (_Ber_., 1897, 30, p. 670) that the velocity
of formation of the amino-azo compound depends only on the nature of the
reagents and not on the concentration, and that in coupling the
hydrochloride of a tertiary amine with diazobenzene sulphonic acid the
reaction takes place between the acid and the base set free by the
hydrolytic dissociation of its salt, for the formation of the amino-azo
compound, when carried out in the presence of different acids, takes place
most rapidly with the weakest acid (H. Goldschmidt and F. Buss, _Ber_.,
1897, 30, p. 2075).

_Methyl orange_ (helianthin, gold orange, Mandarin orange),
(CH_3)_2N·C_6H_4·N_2·C_6H_4SO_3Na, is the sodium salt of
para-dimethylaminobenzene-azo-benzene sulphonic acid. It is an orange
crystalline powder which is soluble in water, forming a yellow solution.
The free acid is intensely red in colour. Methyl orange is used largely as
an indicator. The constitution of methyl orange follows from the fact that
on reduction by stannous chloride in hydrochloric acid solution it yields
sulphanilic acid and para-aminodimethyl aniline.

_Oxyazo Compounds_.--The oxyazo compounds are prepared by adding a solution
of a diazonium salt to a cold slightly alkaline solution of a phenol. The
diazo group takes up the para position [v.03 p.0082] with regard to the
hydroxyl group, and if this be prevented it then goes into the ortho
position. It never goes directly into the meta position.

The constitution of the oxyazo compounds has attracted much attention, some
chemists holding that they are true azophenols of the type R·N_2·R_1·OH,
while others look upon them as having a quinonoid structure, _i.e._ as
being quinone hydrazones, type R·NH·N:R_1:O. The first to attack the purely
chemical side were Th. Zincke (_Ber._, 1883,16, p. 2929; 1884, 17, p. 3026;
1887, 20, p. 3171) and R. Meldola (_Jour. Chem. Soc._, 1889, 55, pp. 114,
603). Th. Zincke found that the products obtained by coupling a diazonium
salt with [alpha]-naphthol, and by condensing phenyl-hydrazine with
[alpha]-naphthoquinone, were identical; whilst Meldola acetylated the
azophenols, and split the acetyl products by reduction in acid solution,
but obtained no satisfactory results. K. Auwers (_Zeit. f. phys. Chem._,
1896, 21, p. 355; _Ber._, 1900, 33, p. 1302) examined the question from the
physico-chemical standpoint by determining the freezing-point depressions,
the result being that the para-oxyazo compounds give abnormal depressions
and the ortho-oxyazo compounds give normal depressions; Auwers then
concluded that the para compounds are phenolic and the ortho compounds are
quinone hydrazones or act as such. A. Hantzsch (_Ber._, 1899, 32, pp. 590,
3089) considers that the oxyazo compounds are to be classed as
pseudo-acids, possessing in the free condition the configuration of quinone
hydrazones, their salts, however, being of the normal phenolic type. J. T.
Hewitt (_Jour. Chem. Soc._, 1900, 77, pp. 99 et seq.) nitrated
para-oxyazobenzene with dilute nitric acid and found that it gave a benzene
azo-ortho-nitrophenol, whereas quinones are not attacked by dilute nitric
acid. Hewitt has also attacked the problem by brominating the
oxyazobenzenes, and has shown that when the hydrobromic acid produced in
the reaction is allowed to remain in the system, a brombenzene-azo-phenol
is formed, whilst if it be removed (by the addition of sodium acetate)
bromination takes place in the phenolic nucleus; consequently the presence
of the mineral acid gives the azo compound a pseudo-quinonoid character,
which it does not possess if the mineral acid be removed from the sphere of
the reaction.

Para-oxyazobenzene (benzene-azo-phenol), C_6H_5N:N(1)·C_6H_4·OH(4), is
prepared by coupling diazotized aniline with phenol in alkaline solution.
It is an orange-red crystalline compound which melts at 154° C.
Ortho-oxyazobenzene, C_6H_5N:N(1)C_6H_4·OH(2), was obtained in small
quantity by E. Bamberger (_Ber._, 1900, 33, p. 3189) simultaneously with
the para compound, from which it may be separated by distillation in a
current of steam, the ortho compound passing over with the steam. It
crystallizes in orange-red needles which melt at 82.5-83° C. On reduction
with zinc dust in dilute sal-ammoniac solution, it yields ortho-aminophenol
and aniline. Meta-oxyazobenzene, C_6H_5N:N(1)C_6H_4·OH(3), was obtained in
1903 by P. Jacobson (_Ber._, 1903, 36, p. 4093) by condensing
ortho-anisidine with diazo benzene, the resulting compound being then
diazotized and reduced by alcohol to benzene-azo-meta-anisole, from which
meta-oxyazobenzene was obtained by hydrolysis with aluminium chloride. It
melts at 112-114° C. and is easily reduced to the corresponding hydrazo
compound.

_Diazo-Amines._--The diazo-amines, R·N:N·NHR_1, are obtained by the action
of primary amines on diazonium salts; by the action of nitrous acid on a
free primary amine, an iso-diazohydroxide being formed as an intermediate
product which then condenses with the amine; and by the action of
nitrosamines on primary amines. They are crystalline solids, usually of a
yellow colour, which do not unite with acids; they are readily converted
into amino-azo compounds (see above) and are decomposed by the concentrated
halogen acids, yielding haloid benzenes, nitrogen and an amine. Acid
anhydrides replace the imino-hydrogen atom by acidyl radicals, and boiling
with water converts them into phenols. They combine with phenyl isocyanate
to form urea derivatives (H. Goldschmidt, _Ber._, 1888, 21, p. 2578), and
on reduction with zinc dust (preferably in alcoholic acetic acid solution)
they yield usually a hydrazine and an amine. Diazoamino benzene,
C_6H_5·N:N·NHC_6H_5, was first obtained by P. Griess (_Ann._, 1862, 121, p.
258). It crystallizes in yellow laminae, which melt at 96° C. and explode
at slightly higher temperatures. It is readily soluble in alcohol, ether
and benzene.

_Diazoimino benzene_, C_6H_5N_3, is also known. It may be prepared by the
action of ammonia on diazobenzene perbromide; by the action of
hydroxylamine on a diazonium sulphate (K. Heumann and L. Oeconomides,
_Ber._, 1887, 20, p. 372); and by the action of phenylhydrazine on a
diazonium sulphate. It is a yellow oil which boils at 59° C. (12 mm.), and
possesses a stupefying odour. It explodes when heated. Hydrochloric acid
converts it into chloraniline, nitrogen being eliminated; whilst boiling
sulphuric acid converts it into aminophenol.

_Azoxy Compounds_, R·[=N·O·N]·R', are usually yellow or red crystalline
solids which result from the reduction of nitro or nitroso compounds by
heating them with alcoholic potash (preferably using methyl alcohol). They
may also be obtained by the oxidation of azo compounds. When reduced (in
acid solution) they yield amines; distillation with reduced iron gives azo
compounds, and warming with ammonium sulphide gives hydrazo compounds.
Concentrated sulphuric acid converts azoxybenzene into oxyazobenzene (O.
Wallach, _Ber._, 1880, 13, p. 525). Azoxybenzene, (C_6H_5N)_2O,
crystallizes from alcohol in yellow needles, which melt at 36° C. On
distillation, it yields aniline and azobenzene. Azoxybenzene is also found
among the electro-reduction products of nitrobenzene, when the reduction is
carried out in alcoholic-alkaline solution.

The mixed azo compounds are those in which the azo group ·N:N· is united
with an aromatic radical on the one hand, and with a radical of the
aliphatic series on the other. The most easily obtained mixed azo compounds
are those formed by the union of a diazonium salt with the potassium or
sodium salt of a nitroparaffin (V. Meyer, _Ber._, 1876, 9, p. 384):

  C_6H_5N_2·NO_3 + CH_3·CH(NO_2)K = KNO_3 + C_6H_5N_2·CH(NO_2)CH_3.
                                          Benzene-azo-nitro-ethane.

Those not containing a nitro group may be prepared by the oxidation of the
corresponding mixed hydrazo compounds with mercuric oxide. E. Bamberger
(_Ber._, 1898, 31, p. 455) has shown that the nitro-alkyl derivatives
behave as though they possess the constitution of hydrazones, for on
heating with dilute alkalies they split more or less readily into an
alkaline nitrite and an acid hydrazide:

  C_6H_5NH·N:C(NO_2)CH_3 + NaOH = NaNO_2 + C_6H_5NH·NH·CO·CH_3.

Benzene-azo-methane, C_6H_5·N_2·CH_3, is a yellow oil which boils at 150°
C. and is readily volatile in steam. Benzene-azo-ethane, C_6H_5·N_2·C_2H_5,
is a yellow oil which boils at about 180° C. with more or less
decomposition. On standing with 60% sulphuric acid for some time, it is
converted into the isomeric acetaldehyde-phenylhydrazone,
C_6H_5NH·N:CH·CH_3 (_Ber._, 1896, 29, p. 794).

The diazo cyanides, C_6H_5N_2·CN, and carboxylic acids, C_6H_5·N_2·COOH,
may also be considered as mixed azo derivatives. Diazobenzenecyanide,
C_6H_5N_2·CN, is an unstable oil, formed when potassium cyanide is added to
a solution of a diazonium salt. Phenyl-azo-carboxylic acid,
C_6H_5·N_2·COOH, is obtained in the form of its potassium salt when
phenylsemicarbazide is oxidized with potassium permanganate in alkaline
solution (J. Thiele, _Ber._, 1895, 28, p. 2600). It crystallizes in
orange-red needles and is decomposed by water. The corresponding amide,
phenyl-azo-carbonamide, C_6H_5N_2·CONH_2, also results from the oxidation
of phenylsemicarbazide (Thiele, _loc. cit._), and forms reddish-yellow
needles which melt at 114° C. When heated with benzaldehyde to 120° C. it
yields diphenyloxytriazole, (C_6H_5)_2CN_3C(OH).