AZOIMIDE, or HYDRAZOIC ACID, N_3H, a compound of nitrogen and hydrogen,
first isolated in 1890 by Th. Curtius (_Berichte_, 1890, 23, p. 3023). It
is the hydrogen compound corresponding to P. Greiss' diazoimino benzene,
C_6H_5N_3, which is prepared by the addition of ammonia to diazobenzene
perbromide.

Curtius found that benzoyl glycollic acid gave benzoyl hydrazine with
hydrazine hydrate:

  C_6H_5OCO·CH_2COOH + 2N_2H_4·H_2O = H_2O + C_6H_5CONH·NH_2 +
                                          NH_2·NH·CH_2·COOH.

[v.03 p.0083] (Ethyl benzoate may be employed instead of benzoyl glycollic
acid for this reaction.) This compound gave a nitroso compound with nitrous
acid, which changed spontaneously into benzoylazoimide by loss of water:

  C_6H_5CO·NH·NH_2 + HONO = H_2O + C_6H_5CO·N(NO)·NH_2.
        C_6H_5CO·N(NO)·NH_2 = H_2O + C_6H_5CO·N_3.

The resulting benzoylazoimide is easily hydrolysed by boiling with
alcoholic solutions of caustic alkalis, a benzoate of the alkali metal and
an alkali salt of the new acid being obtained; the latter is precipitated
in crystalline condition on standing.

An improved method of preparation was found in the use of hippuric acid,
which reacts with hydrazine hydrate to form hippuryl hydrazine,
C_6H_5CONH·CH_2CONH·NH_2, and this substance is converted by nitrous acid
into diazo-hippuramide, C_6H_5CONH·CH_2·CO·NH·N_2·OH, which is hydrolysed
by the action of caustic alkalis with the production of salts of hydrazoic
acid. To obtain the free acid it is best to dissolve the diazo-hippuramide
in dilute soda, warm the solution to ensure the formation of the sodium
salt, and distil the resulting liquid with dilute sulphuric acid. The pure
acid may be obtained by fractional distillation as a colourless liquid of
very unpleasant smell, boiling at 30° C., and extremely explosive. It is
soluble in water, and the solution dissolves many metals (zinc, iron, &c.)
with liberation of hydrogen and formation of salts (azoimides, azides or
hydrazoates). All the salts are explosive and readily interact with the
alkyl iodides. In its properties it shows some analogy to the halogen
acids, since it forms difficultly soluble lead, silver and mercurous salts.
The metallic salts all crystallize in the anhydrous condition and decompose
on heating, leaving a residue of the pure metal. The acid is a "weak" acid,
being ionized only to a very slight extent in dilute aqueous solution.

E. Noelting and E. Grandmougin (_Berichte_, 1891, 24, p. 2546) obtained
azoimide from dinitraniline, C_6H_3(NO_2)_2·NH_2, by diazotization and
conversion of the diazo compound into the perbromide,
(NO_2)_2C_6H_3·N_2·Br_3. This compound is then decomposed by ammonia,
dinitrophenylhydrazoate being formed, which on hydrolysis with alcoholic
potash gives potassium hydrazoate (azide) and dinitrophenol. The solution
is then acidified and distilled, when azoimide passes over. Somewhat later,
they found that it could be prepared from diazobenzene imide, provided a
nitro group were present in the ortho or para position to the diazo group.
The para-nitro compound is dropped slowly into a cold solution of one part
of caustic potash in ten parts of absolute alcohol; the solution becomes
dark red in colour and is then warmed for two days on the water bath. After
the greater portion of the alcohol has distilled off, the solution is
acidified with sulphuric acid and the azoimide distilled over. The yield
obtained is only about 40% of that required by theory, on account of
secondary reactions taking place. Ortho-nitro-diazobenzene imide only
yields 30%.

W. Wislicenus (_Berichte_, 1892, 25, p. 2084) has prepared the sodium salt
by passing nitrous oxide over sodamide at high temperatures. The acid can
also be obtained by the action of nitrous acid on hydrazine sulphate; by
the oxidation of hydrazine by hydrogen peroxide and sulphuric acid (A. W.
Browne, _J. Amer. Chem. Soc._, 1905, 25, p. 251), or by ammonium
metavanadate (A. W. Browne and F. F. Shetterly, _Abst. J.C.S._, 1907, ii.
p. 863).

_Ammonium azoimide_, N_3·NH_4, may be prepared by boiling diazohippuramide
with alcoholic ammonia, until no more ammonia escapes, the following
reaction taking place:

  C_6H_5CO·NHCH_2CONH·N_2·OH + 2NH_3 = N_3·NH_4 + H_2O +
                                          C_6H_5CO·NH·CH_2·CO·NH_2.

The liquid is then allowed to stand for twelve hours, and the clear
alcoholic solution is decanted from the precipitated hippuramide. To the
alcoholic solution, four times its volume of ether is added, when the
ammonium salt is precipitated. It is then filtered, washed with ether, and
air-dried. The salt is readily soluble in water, and is only feebly
alkaline. It is extremely explosive. _Hydrazine azoimide_, N_5H_5, is also
known.

_Chloroazoimide_, Cl·N_3, the chloride corresponding to azoimide, was
obtained by F. Raschig (_Ber._, 1908, 41, p. 4194) as a highly explosive
colourless gas on acidifying a mixture of sodium azide and hypochlorite
with acetic or boric acid.