AZOV, SEA OF an inland sea of southern Europe, communicating with the Black
Sea by the Strait of Yenikale, or Kerch, the ancient _Bosporus Cimmerius_.
To the Romans it was known as the _Palus Maeotis_, from the name of the
neighbouring people, who called it in their native language _Temarenda_, or
Mother of Waters. It was long supposed to possess direct communication with
the Northern Ocean. In prehistoric times a connexion with the Caspian Sea
existed; but since the earliest historical times no great change has taken
place in regard to the character or relations of the Sea of Azov. It lies
between 45° 20' and 47° 18' N. lat, and between 35° and 39° E. long., its
length from south-west to north-east being 230 m., and its greatest breadth
110. The area runs to 14,515 sq. m. It generally freezes from November to
the middle of April. The Don is its largest and, indeed, its only very
important affluent. Near the mouth of that river the depth of the sea
varies from 3 to 10 ft., and the greatest depth does not exceed 45 ft. Of
recent years, too, the level has been constantly dropping, for the surface
lies 4¾ ft. higher than the surface of the Black Sea. Fierce and continuous
winds from the east prevail during July and August, and in the latter part
of the year those from the north-east and south-east are not unusual; a
great variety of currents is thus produced. The water is for the most part
comparatively fresh, but differs considerably in this respect according to
locality and current. Fish are so abundant that the Turks describe it as
_Baluk-deniz_, or Fish Sea. To the west, separated from the main basin by
the long narrow sand-spit of Arabat, lie the remarkable lagoons and marshes
known as the Sivash, or Putrid Sea; here the water is intensely salt. The
Sea of Azov is of great importance to Russian commerce; along its shores
stand the cities of Taganrog, Berdyansk, Mariupol and Yenikale.