AZYMITES (Gr. [Greek: a-], without; [Greek: zumê], leaven), a name given by
the Orthodox Eastern to the Western or Latin Church, because of the
latter's use of unleavened bread in the Eucharist, a practice which arose
in the 9th century and is also observed by Armenians and Maronites
following the Jewish passover custom. The Orthodox Church strenuously
maintains its point, arguing that the very name bread, the holiness of the
mystery, and the example of Jesus and the early church alike, testify
against the use of unleavened bread in this connexion.

[v.03 p.0087]

B This letter corresponds to the second symbol in the Phoenician alphabet,
and appears in the same position in all the European alphabets, except
those derived, like the Russian, from medieval Greek, in which the
pronunciation of this symbol had changed from _b_ to _v_. A new form had
therefore to be invented for the genuine _b_ in Slavonic, to which there
was, at the period when the alphabet was adopted, no corresponding sound in
Greek. The new symbol, which occupies the second position, was made by
removing the upper loop of B, thus producing a symbol somewhat resembling
an ordinary lowercase b. The old B retained the numerical value of the
Greek [beta] as 2, and no numerical value was given to the new symbol. In
the Phoenician alphabet the earliest forms are [Two Bs] or more rounded
[1]. The rounded form appears also in the earliest Aramaic (see ALPHABET).
Like some other alphabetic symbols it was not borrowed by Greek in its
original form. In the very early rock inscriptions of Thera (700-600 B.C.),
written from right to left; it appears in a form resembling the ordinary
Greek [lambda]; this form apparently arose from writing the Semitic symbol
upside down. Its form in inscriptions of Melos, Selinus, Syracuse and
elsewhere in the 6th and 5th centuries suggests the influence of Aramaic
forms in which the head of the letter is opened, [2]. The Corinthian [3],
[4] and [5] (also at Corcyra) and the [Two Bs] of Byzantine coins are other
adaptations of the same symbol. The form [6] which it takes in the
alphabets of Naxos, Delos and other Ionic islands at the same period is
difficult to explain. Otherwise its only variation is between pointed and
rounded loops ([7] and [8]). The sound which the symbol represents is the
voiced stop made by closing the lips and vibrating the vocal chords (see
PHONETICS). It differs from _p_ by the presence of vibration of the vocal
chords and from _m_ because the nasal passage as well as the lips is
closed. When an audible emission of breath attends its production the
aspirate _bh_ is formed. This sound was frequent in the pro-ethnic period
of the Indo-European languages and survived into the Indo-Aryan languages.
According to the system of phonetic changes generally known as "Grimm's
law," an original _b_ appears in English as _p_, an original _bh_ as b. An
original medial _p_ preceding the chief accent of the word also appears as
_b_ in English and the other members of the same group. It is not certain
that any English word is descended from an original word beginning with
_b_, though it has been suggested that _peg_ is of the same origin as the
Latin _baculum_ and the Greek [Greek: baktron]. When the lips are not
tightly closed the sound produced is not a stop, but a spirant like the
English _w_. In Late Latin there was a tendency to this spirant
pronunciation which appears as early as the beginning of the 2nd century
A.D.; by the 3rd century _b_ and consonantal _u_ are inextricably confused.
When this consonantal _u_ (English _w_ as seen in words borrowed very early
from Latin like _wall_ and _wine_) passed into the sound of English _v_
(labio-dental) is not certain, but Germanic words borrowed into Latin in
the 5th century A.D. have in their Latin representation _gu_- for Germanic
_w_-, _guisa_ corresponding to English _wise_ and reborrowed indirectly as
_guise_.

The earliest form of the name of the symbol which we can reach is the
Hebrew _beth_, to which the Phoenician must have been closely akin, as is
shown by the Greek [Greek: bêta], which is borrowed from it with a vowel
affixed.

(P. GI.)

BAADER, FRANZ XAVER VON (1765-1841), German philosopher and theologian,
born on the 27th of March 1765 at Munich, was the third son of F. P.
Baader, court physician to the elector of Bavaria. His brothers were both
distinguished--the elder, Clemens, as an author; the second, Joseph
(1763-1835), as an engineer. Franz studied medicine at Ingolstadt and
Vienna, and for a short time assisted his father in his practice. This life
he soon found uncongenial, and decided on becoming a mining engineer. He
studied under Abraham Gottlob Werner at Freiberg, travelled through several
of the mining districts in north Germany, and for four years, 1792-1796,
resided in England. There he became acquainted with the works of Jakob
Boehme, and with the ideas of Hume, Hartley and Godwin, which were
extremely distasteful to him. The mystical speculations of Meister Eckhart,
Saint Martin, and above all those of Boehme, were more in harmony with his
mode of thought. In 1796 he returned from England, and in Hamburg became
acquainted with F. H. Jacobi, with whom he was for years on terms of
friendship. He now learned something of Schelling, and the works he
published during this period were manifestly influenced by that
philosopher. Yet Baader is no disciple of Schelling, and probably gave out
more than he received. Their friendship continued till about the year 1822,
when Baader's denunciation of modern philosophy in his letter to the
emperor Alexander I. of Russia entirely alienated Schelling.

All this time Baader continued to apply himself to his profession of
engineer. He gained a prize of 12,000 gulden (about £1000) for his new
method of employing Glauber's salts instead of potash in the making of
glass. From 1817 to 1820 he held the post of superintendent of mines, and
was raised to the rank of nobility for his services. He retired in 1820,
and soon after published one of the best of his works, _Fermenta
Cognitionis_, 6 parts, 1822-1825, in which he combats modern philosophy and
recommends the study of Boehme. In 1826, when the new university was opened
at Munich, he was appointed professor of philosophy and speculative
theology. Some of the lectures delivered there he published under the
title, _Spekulative Dogmatik_, 4 parts, 1827-1836. In 1838 he opposed the
interference in civil matters of the Roman Catholic Church, to which he
belonged, and in consequence was, during the last three years of his life,
interdicted from lecturing on the philosophy of religion. He died on the
23rd of May 1841.

It is difficult to summarize Baader's philosophy, for he himself generally
gave expression to his deepest thoughts in obscure aphorisms, or mystical
symbols and analogies (see Ed. Zeller's _Ges. d. deut. Phil._ 732, 736).
Further, he has no systematic works; his doctrines exist for the most part
in short detached essays, in comments on the writings of Boehme and Saint
Martin, or in his extensive correspondence and journals. At the same time
there are salient points which mark the outline of his thought. Baader
starts from the position that human reason by itself can never reach the
end it aims at, and maintains that we cannot throw aside the
presuppositions of faith, church and tradition. His point of view may be
described as Scholasticism; for, like the scholastic doctors, he believes
that theology and philosophy are not opposed sciences, but that reason has
to make clear the truths given by authority and revelation. But in his
attempt to draw still closer the realms of faith and knowledge he
approaches more nearly to the mysticism of Eckhart, Paracelsus and Boehme.
Our existence depends on the fact that we are cognized by God (_cogitor
ergo cogito et sum_). All self-consciousness is at the same time
God-consciousness; our knowledge is never mere _scientia_, it is invariably
_con-scientia_--a knowing with, consciousness of, or participation in God.
Baader's philosophy is thus essentially a theosophy. God is not to be
conceived as mere abstract Being (_substantia_), but as everlasting
process, activity (_actus_). Of this process, this self-generation of God,
we may distinguish two aspects--the immanent or esoteric, and the emanent
or exoteric. God has reality only in so far as He is absolute spirit, and
only in so far as the primitive will is conscious of itself can it become
spirit at all. But in this very cognition of self is involved the
distinction of knower and known, from which proceeds the power to become
spirit. This immanent process of self-consciousness, wherein indeed a
trinity of persons is not given but only rendered possible, is mirrored in,
and takes place through, the eternal and impersonal idea or wisdom of God,
which exists beside, though not distinct from, the primitive will. Concrete
reality or personality is given to this divine _Ternar_, as Baader calls
it, through _nature_, the principle of self-hood, of individual being,
which is eternally and necessarily produced by God. Only in nature is the
trinity of _persons_ attained. These processes, it must be noticed, are not
to be conceived as successive, or as taking place in time; they are to be
looked at _sub specie aeternitatis_, as the necessary elements or moments
in the self-evolution of the divine Being. Nor is _nature_ to be confounded
with created substance, or with matter as it exists in space and time; it
is pure non-being, the mere otherness (_alteritas_) of God-his shadow,
desire, want, or _desiderium sui_, as it is called by mystical writers.
Creation, itself a free and non-temporal act of God's love and will, cannot
be speculatively deduced, but must be accepted as an historic [v.03 p.0088]
fact. Created beings were originally of three orders--the intelligent or
angels; the non-intelligent natural existences; and man, who mediated
between these two orders. Intelligent beings are endowed with freedom; it
is possible, but not necessary, that they should fall. Hence the fact of
the fall is not a speculative but an historic truth. The angels fell
through pride--through desire to raise themselves to equality with God; man
fell by lowering himself to the level of nature. Only after the fall of man
begins the creation of space, time and matter, or of the world as we now
know it; and the motive of this creation was the desire to afford man an
opportunity for taking advantage of the scheme of redemption, for bringing
forth in purity the image of God according to which he has been fashioned.
The physical philosophy and anthropology which Baader, in connexion with
this, unfolds in various works, is but little instructive, and coincides in
the main with the utterances of Boehme. In nature and in man he finds
traces of the dire effects of sin, which has corrupted both and has
destroyed their natural harmony. As regards ethics, Baader rejects the
Kantian or any autonomic system of morals. Not obedience to a moral law,
but realization in ourselves of the divine life is the true ethical end.
But man has lost the power to effect this by himself; he has alienated
himself from God, and therefore no ethical theory which neglects the facts
of sin and redemption is satisfactory or even possible. The history of man
and of humanity is the history of the redeeming love of God. The means
whereby we put ourselves so in relation with Christ as to receive from Him
his healing virtue are chiefly prayer and the sacraments of the church;
mere works are never sufficient. Man in his social relations is under two
great institutions. One is temporal, natural and limited--the state; the
other is eternal, cosmopolitan and universal--the church. In the state two
things are requisite: first, common submission to the ruler, which can be
secured or given only when the state is Christian, for God alone is the
true ruler of men; and, secondly, inequality of rank, without which there
can be no organization. A despotism of mere power and liberalism, which
naturally produces socialism, are equally objectionable. The ideal state is
a civil community ruled by a universal or Catholic church, the principles
of which are equally distinct from mere passive pietism, or faith which
will know nothing, and from the Protestant doctrine, which is the very
radicalism of reason.

Baader is, without doubt, among the greatest speculative theologians of
modern Catholicism, and his influence has extended itself even beyond the
precincts of his own church. Among those whom he influenced were R. Rothe,
Julius Müller and Hans L. Markensen.

His works were collected and published by a number of his adherents--F.
Hoffman, J. Hamberger, E. v. Schaden, Lutterbeck, von Osten-Sacken and
Schlüter--_Baader's sämmtliche Werke_ (16 vols., 1851-1860). Valuable
introductions by the editors are prefixed to the several volumes. Vol. xv.
contains a full biography; vol. xvi. an index, and an able sketch of the
whole system by Lutterbeck. See F. Hoffmann, _Vorhalle zur spekulativen
Lehre Baader's_ (1836); _Grundzüge der Societäts-Philosophie Franz
Baader's_ (1837); _Philosophische Schriften_ (3 vols., 1868-1872); _Die
Weltalter_ (1868); _Biographie und Briefwechsel_ (Leipzig, 1887); J.
Hamberger, _Cardinalpunkte der Baaderschen Philosophie_ (1855);
_Fundamentalbegriffe von F. B.'s Ethik, Politik, u. Religions-Philosophie_
(1858); J. A. B. Lutterbeck, _Philosophische Standpunkte Baaders_ (1854);
_Baaders Lehre vom Weltgebäude_ (1866). The most satisfactory surveys are
those given by Erdmann, _Versuch einer Gesch. d. neuern Phil._ iii. 2, pp.
583-636; J. Claassen, _Franz von Baaders Leben und theosophische Werke_
(Stuttgart, 1886-1887), and _Franz von Baaders Gedanken über Staat und
Gesellschaft_ (Gütersloh, 1890); Otto Pfleiderer, _Philosophy of Religion_
(vol. ii., Eng. trans. 1887); R. Falckenberg, _History of Philosophy_, pp.
472-475 (trans. A. C. Armstrong, New York, 1893); Reichel, _Die
Sozietätsphilosophie Franz v. Baaders_ (Tübingen, 1901); Kuno Fischer, _Zur
hundertjährigen Geburtstagfeier Baaders_ (Erlangen, 1865).

BAAL, a Semitic word, which primarily signifies lord, owner or
inhabitant,[9] and then, in accordance with the Semitic way of looking at
family and religious relations, is specially appropriated to express the
relation of a husband to his wife and of the deity to his worshipper. In
the latter usage it indicated not that the god was the lord of the
worshipper, but rather the possessor of, or ruler in, some place or
district. In the Old Testament it is regularly written with the article,
_i.e._ "_the_ Baal"; and the baals of different tribes or sanctuaries were
not necessarily conceived as identical, so that we find frequent mention of
Baalim, or rather "_the_ Baalim" in the plural. That the Israelites even
applied the title of Baal to Yahweh himself is proved by the occurrence of
such names as Jerubbaal (Gideon), Eshbaal (one of Saul's sons) and Beeliada
(a son of David, 1 Chron. xiv. 7). The last name appears in 2 Sam. v. 16 as
Eliada, showing that El (God) was regarded as equivalent to Baal; cf. also
the name Be`aliah, "Yahweh is _baal_ or lord," which survives in 1 Chron.
xii. 5. However, when the name Baal was exclusively appropriated to
idolatrous worship (cf. Hos. ii. 16 seq.), abhorrence for the unholy word
was marked by writing _b[=o]sheth_ (shameful thing) for _baal_ in compound
proper names, and thus we get the usual forms Ishbosheth, Mephibosheth.

The great difficulty which has been felt by investigators in determining
the character and attributes of the god Baal mainly arises from the
original appellative sense of the word, and many obscure points become
clear if we remember that when a title becomes a proper name it may be
appropriated by different peoples to quite distinct deities. Baal being
originally a title, and not a proper name, the innumerable baals could be
distinguished by the addition of the name of a place or of some special
attribute.[10] Accordingly, the baals are not to be regarded necessarily as
local variations of one and the same god, like the many Virgins or Madonnas
of Catholic lands, but as distinct _numina_. Each community could speak of
its own baal, although a collection of allied communities might share the
same cult, and naturally, since the attributes ascribed to the individual
baals were very similar, subsequent syncretism was facilitated.

The Baal, as the head of each worshipping group, is the source of all the
gifts of nature (cf. Hos. ii. 8 seq., Ezek. xvi. 19); as the god of
fertility all the produce of the soil is his, and his adherents bring to
him their tribute of first-fruits. He is the patron of all growth and
fertility, and, by the "uncontrolled use of analogy characteristic of early
thought," the Baal is the god of the productive element in its widest
sense. Originating probably, in the observation of the fertilizing effect
of rains and streams upon the receptive and reproductive soil, baalism
becomes identical with the grossest nature-worship. Joined with the baals
there are naturally found corresponding female figures known as
Asht[=a]r[=o]th, embodiments of Asht[=o]reth (see ASTARTE; ISHTAR). In
accordance with primitive notions of analogy,[11] which assume that it is
possible to control or aid the powers of nature by the practice of
"sympathetic magic" (see MAGIC), the cult of the baals and Asht[=a]r[=o]th
was characterized by gross sensuality and licentiousness.

The fragmentary allusions to the cult of Baal Peor (Num. xxv., Hos. ix. 10,
Ps. cvi. 28 seq.) exemplify the typical species of Dionysiac orgies that
prevailed.[12] On the summits of hills and mountains flourished the cult of
the givers of increase, and "under every green tree" was practised the
licentiousness which in primitive thought was held to secure abundance of
crops (see Frazer, _Golden Bough_, 2nd ed. vol. ii. pp. 204 sqq.). Human
sacrifice (Jer. xix. 5), the burning of incense (Jer. vii. 9), violent and
ecstatic exercises, ceremonial acts of bowing and kissing, the preparing of
sacred mystic cakes, appear among the offences denounced by the Israelite
prophets, and show that the cult of Baal (and Astarte) included the
characteristic features of heathen worship which recur in various parts of
the Semitic world, although attached to other names.[13]

By an easy transition the local gods of the streams and springs which
fertilized the increase of the fields became identified with [v.03 p.0089]
the common source of all streams, and proceeding along this line it was
possible for the numerous baals to be regarded eventually as mere forms of
one absolute deity. Consequently, the Baal could be identified with some
supreme power of nature, _e.g._ the heavens, the sun, the weather or some
planet. The particular line of development would vary in different places,
but the change from an association of the Baal with earthly objects to
heavenly is characteristic of a higher type of belief and appears to be
relatively later. The idea which has long prevailed that Baal was properly
a sky-god affords no explanation of the local character of the many baals;
on the other hand, on the theory of a higher development where the gods
become heavenly or astral beings, the fact that ruder conceptions of nature
were still retained (often in the unofficial but more popular forms of
cult) is more intelligible.

A specific Baal of the heavens appears to have been known among the
Hittites in the time of Rameses II., and considerably later, at the
beginning of the 7th century, it was the title of one of the gods of
Phoenicia. In Babylonia, from a very early period, Baal became a definite
individual deity, and was identified with the planet Jupiter. This
development is a mark of superior culture and may have been spread through
Babylonian influence. Both Baal and Astarte were venerated in Egypt at
Thebes and Memphis in the XIXth Dynasty, and the former, through the
influence of the Aramaeans who borrowed the Babylonian spelling Bel,
ultimately became known as the Greek Belos who was identified with Zeus.

Of the worship of the Tyrian Baal, who is also called Melkart (king of the
city), and is often identified with the Greek Heracles, but sometimes with
the Olympian Zeus, we have many accounts in ancient writers, from Herodotus
downwards. He had a magnificent temple in insular Tyre, founded by Hiram,
to which gifts streamed from all countries, especially at the great feasts.
The solar character of this deity appears especially in the annual feast of
his awakening shortly after the winter solstice (Joseph. _C. Apion._ i.
18). At Tyre, as among the Hebrews, Baal had his symbolical pillars, one of
gold and one of smaragdus, which, transported by phantasy to the farthest
west, are still familiar to us as the Pillars of Hercules. The worship of
the Tyrian Baal was carried to all the Phoenician colonies.[14] His name
occurs as an element in Carthaginian proper names (Hanni_bal_, Hasdru_bal_,
&c.), and a tablet found at Marseilles still survives to inform us of the
charges made by the priests of the temple of Baal for offering sacrifices.

The history of Baalism among the Hebrews is obscured by the difficulty of
determining whether the false worship which the prophets stigmatize is the
heathen worship of Yahweh under a conception, and often with rites, which
treated him as a local nature god; or whether Baalism was consciously
recognized to be distinct from Yahwism from the first. Later religious
practice was undoubtedly opposed to that of earlier times, and attempts
were made to correct narratives containing views which had come to be
regarded as contrary to the true worship of Yahweh. The Old Testament
depicts the history of the people as a series of acts of apostasy
alternating with subsequent penitence and return to Yahweh, and the
question whether this gives effect to actual conditions depends upon the
precise character of the elements of Yahweh worship brought by the
Israelites into Palestine. This is still under dispute. There is strong
evidence at all events that many of the conceptions are contrary to
historical fact, and the points of similarity between native Canaanite cult
and Israelite worship are so striking that only the persistent traditions
of Israel's origin and of the work of Moses compel the conclusion that the
germs of specific Yahweh worship existed from his day. The earliest certain
reaction against Baalism is ascribed to the reign of Ahab, whose marriage
with Jezebel gave the impulse to the introduction of a particular form of
the cult. In honour of his wife's god, the king, following the example of
Solomon, erected a temple to the Tyrian Baal (see above). This, however,
did not prevent him from remaining a follower of Yahweh, whose prophets he
still consulted, and whose protection he still cherished when he named his
sons Ahaziah and Jehoram ("Yah[weh] holds," "Y. is high"). The antagonism
of Elijah was not against Baalism in general, but against the introduction
of a rival deity. But by the time of Hosea (ii. 16 seq.) a further advance
was marked, and the use of the term "Baal" was felt to be dangerous to true
religion. Thus there gradually grew up a tendency to avoid the term, and in
accordance with the idea of Ex. xxiii. 13, it was replaced by the
contemptuous _b[=o]sheth_, "shame" (see above). However, the books of
Deuteronomy and Jeremiah (cf. also Zeph. i. 4) afford complete testimony
for the prevalence of Baalism as late as the exile, but prove that the
clearest distinction was then drawn between the pure worship of Yahweh the
god of Israel and the inveterate and debased cults of the gods of the land.
(See further HEBREW RELIGION; PROPHET.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--W. Robertson Smith, _Relig. Semites_, 2nd ed. pp. 93-113
(against his theory of the introduction of Baal among the Arabs see M. J.
Lagrange, _Études d. relig. sem._ pp. 83-98). For the reading "Baal" in the
Amarna tablets (Palestine, about 1400 B.C.) see Knudtzon, _Beitr. z.
Assyriol._ (1901), pp. 320 seq., 415; other cuneiform evidence in E.
Schrader's _Keilinsch. u. Alte Test._ 3rd ed. p. 357 (by H. Zimmern; see
also his _Index_, sub voce). On _Baal-Shamem_ (B. of the heavens) M.
Lidzbarski's monograph (_Ephemeris_, i. 243-260, ii. 120) is invaluable,
and this work, with his _Handbuch d. nordsemit. Epigraphik_, contains full
account of the epigraphical material. See Baethgen, _Beitr. z. semit.
Religionsgesch._ pp. 17-32; also the articles on Baal by E. Meyer in
Roscher's _Lexikon_, and G. F. Moore in _Ency. Bib._ (On _Beltane_ fires
and other apparent points of connexion with Baal it may suffice to refer to
Aug. Fick, _Vergleich. Worterbuch_, who derives the element _bel_ from an
old Celtic root meaning shining, &c.)

(W. R. S.; S. A. C.)

[1] Cf. its use as a noun of relation _e.g._ a _ba`al_ of hair, "a hairy
man" (2 Kings i. 8), _b._ of wings, "a winged creature," and in the plural,
_b._ of arrows, "archers" (Gen. xlix. 23), _b._ of oath, "conspirators"
(Neh. vi. 18).

[2] Compounds with geographical terms (towns, mountains), _e.g._ Baal of
Tyre, of Lebanon, &c., are frequent; see G. B. Gray, _Heb. Proper Names,_
pp. 124-126. Baal-berith or El-berith of Shechem (Judg. ix. 4, 46) is
usually interpreted to be the Baal or God of the covenant, but whether of
covenants in general or of a particular covenant concluded at Shechem is
disputed. The [Greek: Balmarkôs] (near Beirut) apparently presided over
dancing; another compound (in Cyprus) seems to represent a Baal of healing.
On the "Baal of flies" see BEELZEBUB.

[3] The general analogy shows itself further in the idea of the deity as
the husband (_ba`al_) of his worshippers or of the land in which they
dwell. The Astarte of Gabal (Byblus) was regularly known as the _ba`alath_
(fem. of _baal_), her real name not being pronounced (perhaps out of
reverence).

[4] See further Clermont-Ganneau, _Pal. Explor. Fund Quart. Stat._, 1901,
pp. 239, 369 sqq.; Büchler, _Rev. d'études juives_, 1901, pp. 125 seq.

[5] The extent to which elements of heathen cult entered into purer types
of religion is illustrated in the worship of Yahweh. The sacred cakes of
Astarte and old holy wells associated with her cult were later even
transferred to the worship of the Virgin (_Ency. Bib._ col. 3993; Rouvier,
in _Bull. Archéol._, 1900, p. 170).

[6] The sanctuary of Heracles at Daphne near Antioch was properly that of
the Semitic Baal, and at Amathus Jupiter Hospes takes the place of Heracles
or Malika, in which the Tyrian Melkart is to be recognized (W. R. Smith,
_Rel. Sem._ 2nd ed. pp. 178, 376). See further PHOENICIA.

BAALBEK (anc. _Heliopolis_), a town of the Buka`a (Coelesyria), altitude
3850 ft., situated E. of the Litani and near the parting between its waters
and those of the Asi. Pop. about 5000, including 2000 Metawali and 1000
Christians (Maronite and Orthodox). Since 1902 Baalbek has been connected
by railway with Rayak (Rejak) on the Beirut-Damascus line, and since 1907
with Aleppo. It is famous for its temple ruins of the Roman period, before
which we have no record of it, certain though it be that Heliopolis is a
translation of an earlier native name, in which Baal was an element. It has
been suggested, but without good reason, that this name was the Baalgad of
Josh. xi. 17.

Heliopolis was made a _colonia_ probably by Octavian (coins of 1st century
A.D.), and there must have been a Baal temple there in which Trajan
consulted the oracle. The foundation of the present buildings, however,
dates from Antoninus Pius, and their dedication from Septimius Severus,
whose coins first show the two temples. The great courts of approach were
not finished before the reigns of Caracalla and Philip. In commemoration,
no doubt, of the dedication of the new sanctuaries, Severus conferred the
_jus Italicum_ on the city. The greater of the two temples was sacred to
Jupiter (Baal), identified with the Sun, with whom were associated Venus
and Mercury as [Greek: sumbômoi theoi]. The lesser temple was built in
honour of Bacchus (not the Sun, as formerly believed). Jupiter-Baal was
represented locally as a beardless god in long scaly drapery, holding a
whip in his right hand and lightning and ears of corn in his left. Two
bulls supported him. In this guise he passed into European worship in the
3rd and 4th centuries A.D. The extreme licence of the Heliopolitan worship
is often animadverted upon by early Christian writers, and Constantine,
making an effort to curb the Venus cult, built a basilica. Theodosius
erected another, with western apse, in the main court of the Jupiter
temple.

When Abu Ubaida (or Obaida) attacked the place after the Moslem capture of
Damascus (A.D. 635), it was still an opulent city and yielded a rich booty.
It became a bone of contention between the various Syrian dynasties and the
caliphs first of Damascus, then of Egypt, and in 748 was sacked with great
slaughter. In 1090 it passed to the Seljuks, and in 1134 to Jenghiz Khan;
but after 1145 it remained attached to Damascus and was captured by Saladin
in 1175. The Crusaders raided its valley more than once, but never took the
city. Three times shaken by earthquake in the 12th century, it was
dismantled by Hulagu in 1260. But it revived, and most of its fine Moslem
mosque and fortress architecture, still extant, belongs to the [v.03
p.0090] reign of Sultan Kala[=u]n (1282) and the succeeding century, during
which Abulfeda describes it as a very strong place. In 1400 Timur pillaged
it, and in 1517 it passed, with the rest of Syria, to the Ottoman dominion.
But Ottoman jurisdiction was merely nominal in the Lebanon district, and
Baalbek was really in the hands of the Metawali (see LEBANON), who retained
it against other Lebanon tribes, until "Jezzar" Pasha, the rebel governor
of the Acre province, broke their power in the last half of the 18th
century. The anarchy which succeeded his death in 1804 was only ended by
the Egyptian occupation (1832). With the treaty of London (1840) Baalbek
became really Ottoman, and since the settlement of the Lebanon (1864) has
attracted great numbers of tourists.

[Illustration]

The ruins were brought to European notice by Pierre Belon in 1555, though
previously visited, in 1507, by Martin von Baumgarten. Much damaged by the
earthquake of 1759, they remained a wilderness of fallen blocks till 1901,
when their clearance was undertaken by the German Archaeological Institute
and entrusted to the direction of Prof. O. Puchstein. They lie mainly on
the ancient Acropolis, which has been shored up with huge walls to form a
terrace raised on vaults and measuring about 1100 ft. from E. to W. The
_Propylaea_ lie at the E. end, and were approached by a flight of steps now
quarried away. These propylaea formed a covered hall, or vestibule, about
35 ft. deep, flanked with towers richly decorated within and without (much
damaged by Arab reconstruction). Columns stood in front, whose bases still
exist and bear the names of Antoninus Pius and Julia Domna. Hence, through
a triple gateway in a richly ornamented screen, access is gained to the
first or Hexagonal Court, which measures about 250 ft. from angle to angle.
It is now razed almost to foundation level; but it can be seen that it was
flanked with halls each having four columns in front. A portal on the W.,
50 ft. wide, flanked by lesser ones 10 ft. wide (that on the N. is alone
preserved), admitted to the Main Court, in whose centre was the High Altar
of Burnt Sacrifice. This altar and a great tank on the N. were covered by
the foundations of Theodosius' basilica and not seen till the recent German
clearance. The Main Court measures about 440 ft. from E. to W. and 370 ft.
from N. to S., thus covering about 3½ acres. It had a continuous fringe of
covered halls of various dimensions and shapes, once richly adorned with
statues and columnar screens. Some of these halls are in fair preservation.
Stairs on the W. led up to the temple of Jupiter-Baal, now much ruined,
having only 6 of the 54 columns of its peristyle erect. Three fell in the
earthquake of 1759. Those still standing are Nos. 11 to 16 in the southern
rank. Their bases and shafts are not finished, though the capitals and rich
entablature seem completely worked. They have a height of 60 ft. and
diameter of 7½ ft., and are mostly formed of three blocks. The architrave
is threefold and bears a frieze with lion-heads, on which rest a moulding
and cornice.

The temple of Bacchus stood on a platform of its own formed by a southern
projection of the Acropolis. It was much smaller than the Jupiter temple,
but is better preserved. The steps of the E. approach were intact up to
1688. The temple was peripteral with 46 columns in its peristyle. These
were over 52 ft. in height and of the Corinthian order, and supported an
entablature 7 ft. high with double frieze, connected with the cella walls
by a coffered ceiling, which contained slabs with heads of gods and
emperors. Richard Burton, when consul-general at Damascus in 1870, cleared
an Arab screen out of the vestibule, and in consequence the exquisite
doorway leading into the cella can now be well seen. On either side of it
staircases constructed within columns lead to the roof. The cracked
door-lintel, which shows an eagle on the soffit, was propped up first by
Burton, and lately, more securely, by the Germans. The cella, now ruinous,
had inner wall-reliefs and engaged columns, which supported rich
entablatures.

The vaults below the Great Court of the Jupiter Temple, together with the
supporting walls of the terrace, are noticeable. In the W. wall of the
latter occur the three famous megaliths, which gave the name _Trilithon_ to
the Jupiter temple in Byzantine times. These measure from 63 to 64 ft. in
length and 13 ft. in height and breadth, and have been raised 20 ft. above
the ground. They are the largest blocks known to have been used in actual
construction, but are excelled by another block still attached to its bed
in the quarries half a mile S.W. This is 68 ft. long by 14 ft. high and
weighs about 1500 tons. For long these blocks were supposed, even by
European visitors, to be relics of a primeval race of giant builders.

In the town, below the Acropolis, on the S.E. is a small temple of the late
imperial age, consisting of a semicircular cella with a peristyle of eight
Corinthian columns, supporting a projecting entablature. The cella is
decorated without with a frieze, and within with pillars and arcading. This
temple owes its preservation to its use as a church of St Barbara, a local
martyr, also claimed by the Egyptian Heliopolis. Hence the building is
known as Barbarat al-atika. Considerable remains of the N. gate of the city
have also been exposed.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--These vast ruins, more imposing from their immensity than
pleasing in detail, have been described by scores of travellers and
tourists; but it will be sufficient here to refer to the following
works:--(First discoverers) M. von Baumgarten, _Peregrinatio in ... Syriam_
(1594); P. Belon, _De admirabili operum antiquorum praestantia_ (1553); and
_Observations_, &c. (1555). (Before earthquake of 1759) R. Wood, _Ruins of
Baalbec_ (1757). (Before excavation) H. Frauberger, _Die Akropolis von
Baalbek_ (1892). (After excavation) O. Puchstein, _Führer durch die Ruinen
v. Baalbek_ (1905), (with Th. v. Lüpke) _Ansichten_, &c. (1905). See also
R. Phené Spiers, _Quart. Stat. Pal. Exp. Fund_, 1904, pp. 58-64, and the
_Builder_, 11 Feb. 1905.

(D. G. H.)

BAARN, a small town in the province of Utrecht, Holland, 5 m. by rail E. of
Hilversum, at the junction of a branch line to Utrecht. Like Hilversum it
is situated in the midst of picturesque and wooded surroundings, and is a
favourite summer resort of people from Amsterdam. The Baarnsche Bosch, or
wood, stretches southward to Soestdyk, where there is a royal [v.03 p.0091]
country-seat, originally acquired by the state in 1795. Louis Bonaparte,
king of Holland, who was very fond of the spot, formed a zoological
collection here which was removed to Amsterdam in 1809. In 1816 the estate
was presented by the nation to the prince of Orange (afterwards King
William II.) in recognition of his services at the battle of Quatre Bras.
Since then the palace and grounds have been considerably enlarged and
beautified. Close to Baarn in the south-west were formerly situated the
ancient castles of Drakenburg and Drakenstein, and at Vuursche there is a
remarkable dolmen.

BABADAG, or BABATAG, a town in the department of Tulcea, Rumania; situated
on a small lake formed by the river Taitza among the densely wooded
highlands of the northern Dobrudja. Pop. (1900) about 3500. The Taitza lake
is divided only by a strip of marshland from Lake Razim, a broad landlocked
sheet of water which opens on the Black Sea. Babadag is a market for the
wool and mutton of the Dobrudja. It was founded by Bayezid I., sultan of
the Turks from 1389 to 1403. It occasionally served as the winter
headquarters of the Turks in their wars with Russia, and was bombarded by
the Russians in 1854.

BABBAGE, CHARLES (1792-1871), English mathematician and mechanician, was
born on the 26th of December 1792 at Teignmouth in Devonshire. He was
educated at a private school, and afterwards entered St Peter's College,
Cambridge, where he graduated in 1814. Though he did not compete in the
mathematical tripos, he acquired a great reputation at the university. In
the years 1815-1817 he contributed three papers on the "Calculus of
Functions" to the _Philosophical Transactions_, and in 1816 was made a
fellow of the Royal Society. Along with Sir John Herschel and George
Peacock he laboured to raise the standard of mathematical instruction in
England, and especially endeavoured to supersede the Newtonian by the
Leibnitzian notation in the infinitesimal calculus. Babbage's attention
seems to have been very early drawn to the number and importance of the
errors introduced into astronomical and other calculations through
inaccuracies in the computation of tables. He contributed to the Royal
Society some notices on the relation between notation and mechanism; and in
1822, in a letter to Sir H. Davy on the application of machinery to the
calculation and printing of mathematical tables, he discussed the
principles of a calculating engine, to the construction of which he devoted
many years of his life. Government was induced to grant its aid, and the
inventor himself spent a portion of his private fortune in the prosecution
of his undertaking. He travelled through several of the countries of
Europe, examining different systems of machinery; and some of the results
of his investigations were published in the admirable little work, _Economy
of Machines and Manufactures_ (1834). The great calculating engine was
never completed; the constructor apparently desired to adopt a new
principle when the first specimen was nearly complete, to make it not a
difference but an analytical engine, and the government declined to accept
the further risk (see CALCULATING MACHINES). From 1828 to 1839 Babbage was
Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge. He contributed largely to
several scientific periodicals, and was instrumental in founding the
Astronomical (1820) and Statistical (1834) Societies. He only once
endeavoured to enter public life, when, in 1832, he stood unsuccessfully
for the borough of Finsbury. During the later years of his life he resided
in London, devoting himself to the construction of machines capable of
performing arithmetical and even algebraical calculations. He died at
London on the 18th of October 1871. He gives a few biographical details in
his _Passages from the Life of a Philosopher_ (1864), a work which throws
considerable light upon his somewhat peculiar character. His works,
pamphlets and papers were very numerous; in the _Passages_ he enumerates
eighty separate writings. Of these the most important, besides the few
already mentioned, are _Tables of Logarithms_ (1826); _Comparative View of
the Various Institutions for the Assurance of Lives_ (1826); _Decline of
Science in England_ (1830); _Ninth Bridgewater Treatise_ (1837); _The
Exposition of 1851_ (1851).

See _Monthly Notices, Royal Astronomical Society_, vol. 32.

BABEL, the native name of the city called Babylon (_q.v._) by the Greeks,
the modern _Hillah_. It means "gate of the god," not "gate of the gods,"
corresponding to the Assyrian _B[=a]b-ili_. According to Gen. xi 1-9 (J),
mankind, after the deluge, travelled from the mountain of the East, where
the ark had rested, and settled in Shinar. Here they attempted to build a
city and a tower whose top might reach unto heaven, but were miraculously
prevented by their language being confounded. In this way the diversity of
human speech and the dispersion of mankind were accounted for; and in Gen.
xi. 9 (J) an etymology was found for the name of Babylon in the Hebrew verb
_b[=a]lal_, "to confuse or confound," Babel being regarded as a contraction
of Balbel. In Gen. x. 10 it is said to have formed part of the kingdom of
Nimrod.

The origin of the story has not been found in Babylonia. The tower was no
doubt suggested by one of the temple towers of Babylon. W. A. Bennet
(_Genesis_, p. 169; cf. Hommel in Hastings' _Dictionary of the Bible_)
suggests E-Saggila, the great temple of Merodach (Marduk). The variety of
languages and the dispersion of mankind were regarded as a curse, and it is
probable that, as Prof. Cheyne (_Encyclopaedia Biblica_, col. 411) says,
there was an ancient North Semitic myth to explain it. The event was
afterwards localized in Babylon. The myth, as it appears in Genesis, is
quite polytheistic and anthropomorphic. According to Cornelius Alexander
(frag. 10) and Abydenus (frags. 5 and 6) the tower was overthrown by the
winds; according to Yaqut (i. 448 f.) and the Lisan el-`Arab (xiii. 72)
mankind were swept together by winds into the plain afterwards called
"Babil," and were scattered again in the same way (see further D. B.
Macdonald in the _Jewish Encyclopaedia_). A tradition similar to that of
the tower of Babel is found in Central America. Xelhua, one of the seven
giants rescued from the deluge, built the great pyramid of Cholula in order
to storm heaven. The gods, however, destroyed it with fire and confounded
the language of the builders. Traces of a somewhat similar story have also
been met with among the Mongolian Tharus in northern India (_Report of the
Census of Bengal_, 1872, p. 160), and, according to Dr Livingstone, among
the Africans of Lake Ngami. The Esthonian myth of "the Cooking of
Languages" (Kohl, _Reisen in die Ostseeprovinzen_, ii. 251-255) may also be
compared, as well as the Australian legend of the origin of the diversity
of speech (Gerstäcker, _Reisen_, vol. iv. pp. 381 seq.).

BAB-EL-MANDEB (Arab, for "The Gate of Tears"), the strait between Arabia
and Africa which connects the Red Sea (_q.v._) with the Indian Ocean. It
derives its name from the dangers attending its navigation, or, according
to an Arabic legend, from the numbers who were drowned by the earthquake
which separated Asia and Africa. The distance across is about 20 m. from
Ras Menheli on the Arabian coast to Ras Siyan on the African. The island of
Perim (_q.v._), a British possession, divides the strait into two channels,
of which the eastern, known as the Bab Iskender (Alexander's Strait), is 2
m. wide and 16 fathoms deep, while the western, or Dact-el-Mayun, has a
width of about 16 m. and a depth of 170 fathoms. Near the African coast
lies a group of smaller islands known as the "Seven Brothers." There is a
surface current inwards in the eastern channel, but a strong under-current
outwards in the western channel.

BABENBERG, the name of a Franconian family which held the duchy of Austria
before the rise of the house of Habsburg. Its earliest known ancestor was
one Poppo, who early in the 9th century was count in Grapfeld. One of his
sons, Henry, called margrave and duke in Franconia, fell fighting against
the Normans in 886; another, Poppo, was margrave in Thuringia from 880 to
892, when he was deposed by the German king Arnulf. The family had been
favoured by the emperor Charles the Fat, but Arnulf reversed this policy in
favour of the rival family of the Conradines. The leaders of the Babenbergs
were the three sons of Duke Henry, who called themselves after their castle
of Babenberg on the upper Main, round which their possessions centred. The
rivalry between the two families was intensified by their efforts to extend
their authority in the region of the middle Main, and this quarrel, known
as the "Babenberg feud," came to a head at the beginning of the 10th
century during the [v.03 p.0092] troubled reign of the German king, Louis
the Child. Two of the Babenberg brothers were killed, and the survivor
Adalbert was summoned before the imperial court by the regent Hatto I.,
archbishop of Mainz, a partisan of the Conradines. He refused to appear,
held his own for a time in his castle at Theres against the king's forces,
but surrendered in 906, and in spite of a promise of safe-conduct was
beheaded. From this time the Babenbergs lost their influence in Franconia;
but in 976 Leopold, a member of the family who was a count in the Donnegau,
is described as margrave of the East Mark, a district not more than 60 m.
in breadth on the eastern frontier of Bavaria which grew into the duchy of
Austria. Leopold, who probably received the mark as a reward for his
fidelity to the emperor Otto II. during the Bavarian rising in 976,
extended its area at the expense of the Hungarians, and was succeeded in
994 by his son Henry I. Henry, who continued his father's policy, was
followed in 1018 by his brother Adalbert and in 1055 by his nephew Ernest,
whose marked loyalty to the emperors Henry III. and Henry IV. was rewarded
by many tokens of favour. The succeeding margrave, Leopold II., quarrelled
with Henry IV., who was unable to oust him from the mark or to prevent the
succession of his son Leopold III. in 1096. Leopold supported Henry, son of
Henry IV., in his rising against his father, but was soon drawn over to the
emperor's side, and in 1106 married his daughter Agnes, widow of Frederick
I., duke of Swabia. He declined the imperial crown in 1125. His zeal in
founding monasteries earned for him his surname "the Pious," and
canonization by Pope Innocent VIII. in 1485. He is regarded as the patron
saint of Austria. One of Leopold's sons was Otto, bishop of Freising
(_q.v._). His eldest son, Leopold IV., became margrave in 1136, and in 1139
received from the German king Conrad III. the duchy of Bavaria, which had
been forfeited by Duke Henry the Proud. Leopold's brother Henry (surnamed
Jasomirgott from his favourite oath, "So help me God!") was made count
palatine of the Rhine in 1140, and became margrave of Austria on Leopold's
death in 1141. Having married Gertrude, the widow of Henry the Proud, he
was invested in 1143 with the duchy of Bavaria, and resigned his office as
count palatine. In 1147 he went on crusade, and after his return renounced
Bavaria at the instance of the new king Frederick I. As compensation for
this, Austria, the capital of which had been transferred to Vienna in 1146,
was erected into a duchy. The second duke was Henry's son Leopold I., who
succeeded him in 1177 and took part in the crusades of 1182 and 1190. In
Palestine he quarrelled with Richard I., king of England, captured him on
his homeward journey and handed him over to the emperor Henry VI. Leopold
increased the territories of the Babenbergs by acquiring Styria in 1192
under the will of his kinsman Duke Ottakar IV. He died in 1194, and Austria
fell to one son, Frederick, and Styria to another, Leopold; but on
Frederick's death in 1198 they were again united by Duke Leopold II.,
surnamed "the Glorious." The new duke fought against the infidel in Spain,
Egypt and Palestine, but is more celebrated as a lawgiver, a patron of
letters and a founder of towns. Under him Vienna became the centre of
culture in Germany and the great school of Minnesingers (_q.v._). His later
years were spent in strife with his son Frederick, and he died in 1230 at
San Germano, whither he had gone to arrange the peace between the emperor
Frederick II. and Pope Gregory IX. His son Frederick II. followed as duke,
and earned the name of "Quarrelsome" by constant struggles with the kings
of Hungary and Bohemia and with the emperor. He deprived his mother and
sisters of their possessions, was hated by his subjects on account of his
oppressions, and in 1236 was placed under the imperial ban and driven from
Austria. Restored when the emperor was excommunicated, he treated in vain
with Frederick for the erection of Austria into a kingdom. He was killed in
battle in 1246, when the male line of the Babenbergs became extinct. The
city of Bamberg grew up around the ancestral castle of the family.

See G. Juritsch, _Geschichte der Babenberger und ihrer Länder_ (Innsbruck,
1894); M. Schmitz, _Oesterreichs Scheyern-Wittelsbacher oder die Dynastie
der Babenberger_ (Munich, 1880).

BABER, or BABAR (1483-1530), a famous conqueror of India and founder of the
so-called Mogul dynasty. His name was Zahir ud-din-Mahomet, and he was
given the surname of Baber, meaning the tiger. Born on the 14th of February
1483, he was a descendant of Timur, and his father, Omar Sheik, was king of
Ferghana, a district of what is now Russian Turkestan. Omar died in 1495,
and Baber, though only twelve years of age, succeeded to the throne. An
attempt made by his uncles to dislodge him proved unsuccessful, and no
sooner was the young sovereign firmly settled than he began to meditate an
extension of his own dominions. In 1497 he attacked and gained possession
of Samarkand, to which he always seems to have thought he had a natural and
hereditary right. A rebellion among his nobles robbed him of his native
kingdom, and while marching to recover it his troops deserted him, and he
lost Samarkand also. After some reverses he regained both these places, but
in 1501 his most formidable enemy, Shaibani (Sheibani) Khan, ruler of the
Uzbegs, defeated him in a great engagement and drove him from Samarkand.
For three years he wandered about trying in vain to recover his lost
possessions; at last, in 1504, he gathered some troops, and crossing the
snowy Hindu Kush besieged and captured the strong city of Kabul. By this
dexterous stroke he gained a new and wealthy kingdom, and completely
re-established his fortunes. In the following year he united with Hussain
Mirza of Herat against Shaibani. The death of Hussain put a stop to this
expedition, but Baber spent a year at Herat, enjoying the pleasures of that
capital. He returned to Kabul in time to quell a formidable rebellion, but
two years later a revolt among some of the leading Moguls drove him from
his city. He was compelled to take to flight with very few companions, but
his great personal courage and daring struck the army of his opponents with
such dismay that they again returned to their allegiance and Baber regained
his kingdom. Once again, in 1510, after the death of Shaibani, he
endeavoured to obtain possession of his native country. He received
considerable aid from Shah Ismael of Persia, and in 1511 made a triumphal
entry into Samarkand. But in 1514 he was utterly defeated by the Uzbegs and
with difficulty reached Kabul. He seems now to have resigned all hopes of
recovering Ferghana, and as he at the same time dreaded an invasion of the
Uzbegs from the west, his attention was more and more drawn towards India.
Several preliminary incursions had been already made, when in 1521 an
opportunity presented itself for a more extended expedition. Ibrahim,
emperor of Delhi, had made himself detested, even by his Afghan nobles,
several of whom called upon Baber for assistance. He at once assembled his
forces, 12,000 strong, with some pieces of artillery and marched into
India. Ibrahim, with 100,000 soldiers and numerous elephants, advanced
against him. The great battle was fought at Panipat on the 21st of April
1526, when Ibrahim was slain and his army routed. Baber at once took
possession of Agra. A still more formidable enemy awaited him; the Rana
Sanga of Mewar collected the enormous force of 210,000 men, with which he
moved against the invaders. On all sides there was danger and revolt, even
Baber's own soldiers, worn out with the heat of this new climate, longed
for Kabul. By vigorous measures and inspiriting speeches he restored their
courage, though his own heart was nearly failing him, and in his distress
he abjured the use of wine, to which he had been addicted. At Kanwaha, on
the 10th of March 1527, he won a great victory and made himself absolute
master of northern India. The remaining years of his life he spent in
arranging the affairs and revenues of his new empire and in improving his
capital, Agra. He died on the 26th of December 1530 in his forty-eighth
year. Baber was above the middle height, of great strength and an admirable
archer and swordsman. His mind was as well cultivated as his bodily powers;
he wrote well, and his observations are generally acute and accurate; he
was brave, kindly and generous.

Full materials for his life are found in his _Memoirs_, written by himself
(translated into English by Leyden and Erskine (London, 1826); abridged in
Caldecott, _Life of Baber_ (London, 1844). See also Lane-Poole, _Baber_
(Rulers of India Series), 1899.

[v.03 p.0093] BABEUF, FRANÇOIS NOEL (1760-1797), known as GRACCHUS BABEUF,
French political agitator and journalist, was born at Saint Quentin on the
23rd of November 1760. His father, Claude Babeuf, had deserted the French
army in 1738 and taken service under Maria Theresa, rising, it is said, to
the rank of major. Amnestied in 1755 he returned to France, but soon sank
into dire poverty, being forced to earn a pittance for his wife and family
as a day labourer. The hardships endured by Babeuf during early years do
much to explain his later opinions. He had received from his father the
smatterings of a liberal education, but until the outbreak of the
Revolution he was a domestic servant, and from 1785 occupied the invidious
office of _commissaire à terrier_, his function being to assist the nobles
and priests in the assertion of their feudal rights as against the
unfortunate peasants. On the eve of the Revolution Babeuf was in the employ
of a land surveyor at Roye. His father had died in 1780, and he was now the
sole support, not only of his wife and two children, but of his mother,
brothers and sisters. In the circumstances it is not surprising that he was
the life and soul of the malcontents of the place. He was an indefatigable
writer, and the first germ of his future socialism is contained in a letter
of the 21st of March 1787, one of a series--mainly on literature--addressed
to the secretary of the Academy of Arras. In 1789 he drew up the first
article of the _cahier_ of the electors of the _bailliage_ of Roye,
demanding the abolition of feudal rights. Then, from July to October, he
was in Paris superintending the publication of his first work: _Cadastre
perpétuel, dédié à l'assemblée nationale, l'an 1789 et le premier de la
liberté française_, which was written in 1787 and issued in 1790. The same
year he published a pamphlet against feudal aids and the _gabelle_, for
which he was denounced and arrested, but provisionally released. In
October, on his return to Roye, he founded the _Correspondant picard_, the
violent character of which cost him another arrest. In November he was
elected a member of the municipality of Roye, but was expelled. In March
1791 he was appointed commissioner to report on the national property
(_biens nationaux_) in the town, and in September 1792 was elected a member
of the council-general of the department of the Somme. Here, as everywhere,
the violence of his attitude made his position intolerable to himself and
others, and he was soon transferred to the post of administrator of the
district of Montdidier. Here he was accused of fraud for having substituted
one name for another in a deed of transfer of national lands. It is
probable that his fault was one of negligence only; but, distrusting the
impartiality of the judges of the Somme, he fled to Paris, and on the 23rd
of August 1793 was condemned _in contumaciam_ to twenty years'
imprisonment. Meanwhile he had been appointed secretary to the relief
committee (_comité des subsistances_) of the commune of Paris. The judges
of Amiens, however, pursued him with a warrant for his arrest, which took
place in Brumaire of the year II. (1794). The court of cassation quashed
the sentence, through defect of form, but sent Babeuf for a new trial
before the Aisne tribunal, by which he was acquitted on the 18th of July.

Babeuf now returned to Paris, and on the 3rd of September 1794 published
the first number of his _Journal de la liberté de la presse_, the title of
which was altered on the 5th of October to _Le Tribun du peuple_. The
execution of Robespierre on the 28th of July had ended the Terror, and
Babeuf--now self-styled "Gracchus" Babeuf--defended the men of Thermidor
and attacked the fallen terrorists with his usual violence. But he also
attacked, from the point of view of his own socialistic theories, the
economic outcome of the Revolution. This was an attitude which had few
supporters, even in the Jacobin club, and in October Babeuf was arrested
and sent to prison at Arras. Here he came under the influence of certain
terrorist prisoners, notably of Lebois, editor of the _Journal de
l'égalité_, afterwards of the _Ami du peuple_, papers which carried on the
traditions of Marat. He emerged from prison a confirmed terrorist and
convinced that his Utopia, fully proclaimed to the world in No. 33 of his
_Tribun_, could only be realized through the restoration of the
constitution of 1793. He was now in open conflict with the whole trend of
public opinion. In February 1795 he was again arrested, and the _Tribun du
peuple_ was solemnly burnt in the Théâtre des Bergères by the _jeunesse
dorée_, the young men whose mission it was to bludgeon Jacobinism out of
the streets and cafés. But for the appalling economic conditions produced
by the fall in the value of _assignats_, Babeuf might have shared the fate
of other agitators who were whipped into obscurity.

It was the attempts of the Directory to deal with this economic crisis that
gave Babeuf his real historic importance. The new government was pledged to
abolish the vicious system by which Paris was fed at the expense of all
France, and the cessation of the distribution of bread and meat at nominal
prices was fixed for the 20th of February 1796. The announcement caused the
most wide-spread consternation. Not only the workmen and the large class of
idlers attracted to Paris by the system, but _rentiers_ and government
officials, whose incomes were paid in _assignats_ on a scale arbitrarily
fixed by the government, saw themselves threatened with actual starvation.
The government yielded to the outcry that arose; but the expedients by
which it sought to mitigate the evil, notably the division of those
entitled to relief into classes, only increased the alarm and the
discontent. The universal misery gave point to the virulent attacks of
Babeuf on the existing order, and at last gained him a hearing. He gathered
round him a small circle of his immediate followers known as the _Société
des Égaux_, soon merged with the rump of the Jacobins, who met at the
Pantheon; and in November 1795 he was reported by the police to be openly
preaching "insurrection, revolt and the constitution of 1793."

For a time the government, while keeping itself informed of his activities,
left him alone; for it suited the Directory to let the socialist agitation
continue, in order to frighten the people from joining in any royalist
movement for the overthrow of the existing regime. Moreover the mass of the
_ouvriers_, even of extreme views, were repelled by Babeuf's
bloodthirstiness; and the police agents reported that his agitation was
making many converts--for the government. The Jacobin club of the Faubourg
Saint-Antoine refused to admit Babeuf and Lebois, on the ground that they
were "_égorgeurs_." With the development of the economic crisis, however,
Babeuf's influence increased. After the club of the Pantheon was closed by
Bonaparte, on the 27th of February 1796, his aggressive activity redoubled.
In Ventôse and Germinal he published, under the _nom de plume_ of "Lalande,
soldat de la patrie," a new paper, the _Éclaireur du peuple, ou le
défenseur de vingt-cinq millions d'opprimés_, which was hawked
clandestinely from group to group in the streets of Paris. At the same time
No. 40 of the _Tribun_ excited an immense sensation. In this he praised the
authors of the September massacres as "deserving well of their country,"
and declared that a more complete "September 2nd" was needed to annihilate
the actual government, which consisted of "starvers, bloodsuckers, tyrants,
hangmen, rogues and mountebanks." The distress among all classes continued
to be appalling; and in March the attempt of the Directory to replace the
_assignats_ (_q.v._) by a new issue of _mandats_ created fresh
dissatisfaction after the breakdown of the hopes first raised. A cry went
up that national bankruptcy had been declared, and thousands of the lower
class of _ouvrier_ began to rally to Babeuf's flag. On the 4th of April it
was reported to the government that 500,000 people in Paris were in need of
relief. From the 11th Paris was placarded with posters headed _Analyse de
la doctrine de Baboeuf_ (sic), _tribun du peuple_, of which the opening
sentence ran: "Nature has given to every man the right to the enjoyment of
an equal share in all property," and which ended with a call to restore the
constitution of 1793. Babeuf's song _Mourant de faim, mourant de froid_
(Dying of hunger, dying of cold), set to a popular air, began to be sung in
the cafés, with immense applause; and reports were current that the
disaffected troops in the camp of Grenelle were ready to join an _émeute_
against the government. The Directory thought it time to act; the _bureau
central_ had accumulated through its agents, notably the ex-captain Georges
[v.03 p.0094] Grisel, who had been initiated into Babeuf's society,
complete evidence of a conspiracy for an armed rising fixed for Floréal 22,
year IV. (11th of May 1796), in which Jacobins and socialists were
combined. On the 10th of May Babeuf was arrested with many of his
associates, among whom were A. Darthé and P. M. Buonarroti, the ex-members
of the Convention, Robert Lindet, J. A. B. Amar, M. G. A. Vadier and Jean
Baptiste Drouet, famous as the postmaster of Saint-Menehould who had
arrested Louis XVI., and now a member of the Council of Five Hundred.

The _coup_ was perfectly successful. The last number of the _Tribun_
appeared on the 24th of April, but Lebois in the _Ami du peuple_ tried to
incite the soldiers to revolt, and for a while there were rumours of a
military rising. The trial of Babeuf and his accomplices was fixed to take
place before the newly constituted high court of justice at Vendôme. On
Fructidor 10 and 11 (27th and 28th of August), when the prisoners were
removed from Paris, there were tentative efforts at a riot with a view to
rescue, but these were easily suppressed. The attempt of five or six
hundred Jacobins (7th of September) to rouse the soldiers at Grenelle met
with no better success. The trial of Babeuf and the others, begun at
Vendôme on the 20th of February 1797, lasted two months. The government for
reasons of their own made the socialist Babeuf the leader of the
conspiracy, though more important people than he were implicated; and his
own vanity played admirably into their hands. On Prairial 7 (26th of April
1797) Babeuf and Darthé were condemned to death; some of the prisoners,
including Buonarroti, were exiled; the rest, including Vadier and his
fellow-conventionals, were acquitted. Drouet had succeeded in making his
escape, according to Barras, with the connivance of the Directory. Babeuf
and Darthé were executed at Vendôme on Prairial 8 (1797).

Babeuf's character has perhaps been sufficiently indicated above. He was a
type of the French revolutionists, excitable, warm-hearted, half-educated,
who lost their mental and moral balance in the chaos of the revolutionary
period. Historically, his importance lies in the fact that he was the first
to propound socialism as a practical policy, and the father of the
movements which played so conspicuous a part in the revolutions of 1848 and
1871.

See V. Advielle, _Hist. de Gracchus Babeuf et de Babouvisme_ (2 vols.,
Paris, 1884); P. M. Buonarroti, _Conspiration pour l'égalité, dite de
Babeuf_ (2 vols., Brussels, 1828; later editions, 1850 and 1869), English
translation by Bronterre O'Brien (London, 1836); _Cambridge Modern
History_, vol. viii.; Adolf Schmidt, _Pariser Zustände wahrend der
Revolutionszeit von 1789-1800_ (Jena, 1874). French trans. by P. Viollet,
_Paris pendant la Révolution d'après les rapports de la police secrète,
1789-1800_ (4 vols., 1880-1894); A. Schmidt, _Tableaux de la Révolution
française, &c._ (Leipzig, 1867-1870), a collection of reports of the secret
police on which the above work is based. A full report of the trial at
Vendôme was published in four volumes at Paris in 1797, _Débats du procès,
&c._

(W. A. P.)

BÁBÍISM, the religion founded in Persia in A.D. 1844-1845 by Mírzá `Alí
Muhammad of Shíráz, a young Sayyid who was at that time not twenty-five
years of age. Before his "manifestation" (_zuhúr_), of which he gives in
the Persian _Bayán_ a date corresponding to 23rd May 1844, he was a
disciple of Sayyid Kázim of Rasht, the leader of the Shaykhís, a sect of
extreme Shí`ites characterized by the doctrine (called by them
_Rukn-i-rábi`_, "the fourth support") that at all times there must exist an
intermediary between the twelfth Imám and his faithful followers. This
intermediary they called "the perfect Shí`ite," and his prototype is to be
found in the four successive _Bábs_ or "gates" through whom alone the
twelfth Imám, during the period of his "minor occultation"
(_Ghaybat-i-sughrá_, A.D. 874-940), held communication with his partisans.
It was in this sense, and not, as has been often asserted, in the sense of
"Gate of God" or "Gate of Religion," that the title _Báb_ was understood
and assumed by Mírzá `Alí Muhammad; but, though still generally thus styled
by non-Bábís, he soon assumed the higher title of _Nuqta_ ("Point"), and
the title _Báb_, thus left vacant, was conferred on his ardent disciple,
Mullá Husayn of Bushrawayh.

The history of the Bábís, though covering a comparatively short period, is
so full of incident and the particulars now available are so numerous, that
the following account purports to be only the briefest sketch. The Báb
himself was in captivity first at Shíráz, then at Mákú, and lastly at
Chihríq, during the greater part of the six years (May 1844 until July
1850) of his brief career, but an active propaganda was carried on by his
disciples, which resulted in several serious revolts against the
government, especially after the death of Muhammad Sháh in September 1848.
Of these risings the first (December 1848-July 1849) took place in
Mázandarán, at the ruined shrine of Shaykh Tabarsí, near Bárfurúsh, where
the Bábís, led by Mullá Muhammad `Alí of Bárfurúsh and Mullá Husayn of
Bushrawayh ("the first who believed"), defied the shah's troops for seven
months before they were finally subdued and put to death. The revolt at
Zanján in the north-west of Persia, headed by Mullá Muhammad `Ali Zanjání,
also lasted seven or eight months (May-December 1850), while a serious but
less protracted struggle was waged against the government at Níríz in Fárs
by Agá Sayyid Yahyá of Níríz. Both revolts were in progress when the Báb,
with one of his devoted disciples, was brought from his prison at Chihríq
to Tabríz and publicly shot in front of the _arg_ or citadel. The body,
after being exposed for some days, was recovered by the Bábís and conveyed
to a shrine near Tehrán, whence it was ultimately removed to Acre in Syria,
where it is now buried. For the next two years comparatively little was
heard of the Bábís, but on the 15th of August 1852 three of them, acting on
their own initiative, attempted to assassinate Násiru'd-Dín Sháh as he was
returning from the chase to his palace at Niyávarán. The attempt failed,
but was the cause of a fresh persecution, and on the 31st of August 1852
some thirty Bábís, including the beautiful and talented poetess
Qurratu'l-'Ayn, were put to death in Tehrán with atrocious cruelty. Another
of the victims of that day was Hájji Mírzá Jání of Káshán, the author of
the oldest history of the movement from the Bábí point of view. Only one
complete MS. of his invaluable work (obtained by Count Gobineau in Persia)
exists in any public library, the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris. The
so-called "New History" (of which an English translation was published at
Cambridge in 1893 by E. G. Browne) is based on Mírzá Jání's work, but many
important passages which did not accord with later Bábí doctrine or policy
have been suppressed or modified, while some additions have been made. The
Báb was succeeded on his death by Mírzá Yahyá of Núr (at that time only
about twenty years of age), who escaped to Bagdad, and, under the title of
_Subh-i-Ezel_ ("the Morning of Eternity"), became the pontiff of the sect.
He lived, however, in great seclusion, leaving the direction of affairs
almost entirely in the hands of his elder half-brother (born 12th November
1817), Mírzá Husayn `Alí, entitled _Bahá' u'lláh_ ("the Splendour of God"),
who thus gradually became the most conspicuous and most influential member
of the sect, though in the _Iqán_, one of the most important polemical
works of the Bábís, composed in 1858-1859, he still implicitly recognized
the supremacy of _Subh-i-Ezel_. In 1863, however, Bahá declared himself to
be "He whom God shall manifest" (_Man Yuz-hiruhu'lláh_, with prophecies of
whose advent the works of the Báb are filled), and called on all the Bábís
to recognize his claim. The majority responded, but _Subh-i-Ezel_ and some
of his faithful adherents refused. After that date the Bábís divided into
two sects, Ezelís and Bahá'ís, of which the former steadily lost and the
latter gained ground, so that in 1908 there were probably from half a
million to a million of the latter, and at most only a hundred or two of
the former. In 1863 the Bábís were, at the instance of the Persian
government, removed from Bagdad to Constantinople, whence they were shortly
afterwards transferred to Adrianople. In 1868 Bahá and his followers were
exiled to Acre in Syria, and _Subh-i-Ezel_ with his few adherents to
Famagusta in Cyprus, where he was still living in 1908. Bahá'u'lláh died at
Acre on the 16th of May 1892. His son `Abbás Efendí (also called
`Abdu'l-Bahá, "the servant of Bahá") was generally recognized as his
successor, but another of his four sons, Muhammad `Alí, put forward a rival
claim. This caused a fresh and bitter schism, but `Abbás Efendí steadily
gained ground, and there could be little doubt as to his eventual [v.03
p.0095] triumph. The controversial literature connected with this latest
schism is abundant, not only in Persian, but in English, for since 1900
many Americans have adopted the religion of Bahá. The original apostle of
America was Ibráhím George Khayru'lláh, who began his propaganda at the
Chicago Exhibition and later supported the claims of Muhammad `Alí. Several
Persian missionaries, including the aged and learned Mírzá Abu'l-Fazl of
Gulpáyagán, were thereupon despatched to America by `Abbás Efendí, who was
generally accepted by the American Bahá'ís as "the Master." The American
press contained many notices of the propaganda and its success. An
interesting article on the subject, by Stoyan Krstoff Vatralsky of Boston,
Mass., entitled "Mohammedan Gnosticism in America," appeared in the
_American Journal of Theology_ for January 1902, pp. 57-58.

A correct understanding of the doctrines of the early Bábís (now
represented by the Ezelís) is hardly possible save to one who is conversant
with the theology of Islám and its developments, and especially the tenets
of the Shí`a. The Bábís are Muhammadans only in the sense that the
Muhammadans are Christians or the Christians Jews; that is to say, they
recognize Muhammad (Mahomet) as a true prophet and the Qur'án (Koran) as a
revelation, but deny their finality. Revelation, according to their view,
is progressive, and no revelation is final, for, as the human race
progresses, a fuller measure of truth, and ordinances more suitable to the
age, are vouchsafed. The Divine Unity is incomprehensible, and can be known
only through its Manifestations; to recognize the Manifestation of the
cycle in which he lives is the supreme duty of man. Owing to the enormous
volume and unsystematic character of the Bábí scriptures, and the absence
of anything resembling church councils, the doctrine on many important
points (such as the future life) is undetermined and vague. The
resurrection of the body is denied, but some form of personal immortality
is generally, though not universally, accepted. Great importance was
attached to the mystical values of letters and numbers, especially the
numbers 18 and 19 ("the number of the unity") and 19² = 361 ("the number of
all things"). In general, the Báb's doctrines most closely resembled those
of the Isma`ílís and Hurúfís. In the hands of Bahá the aims of the sect
became much more practical and ethical, and the wilder pantheistic
tendencies and metaphysical hair-splittings of the early Bábís almost
disappeared. The intelligence, integrity and morality of the Bábís are
high, but their efforts to improve the social position of woman have been
much exaggerated. They were in no way concerned (as was at the time falsely
alleged) in the assassination of Násiru'd-Dín Sháh in May 1896. Of recent
persecutions of the sect the two most notable took place at Yazd, one in
May 1891, and another of greater ferocity in June 1903. Some account of the
latter is given by Napier Malcolm in his book _Five Years in a Persian
Town_ (London, 1905), pp. 87-89 and 186. In the constitutional movement in
Persia (1907) the Bábís, though their sympathies are undoubtedly with the
reformers, wisely refrained from outwardly identifying themselves with that
party, to whom their open support, by alienating the orthodox _mujtahids_
and _mullás_, would have proved fatal. Here, as in all their actions, they
clearly obeyed orders issued from headquarters.

LITERATURE.--The literature of the sect is very voluminous, but mostly in
manuscript. The most valuable public collections in Europe are at St
Petersburg, London (British Museum) and Paris (Bibliothèque Nationale),
where two or three very rare MSS. collected by Gobineau, including the
precious history of the Báb's contemporary, Hájji Mírzá Jání of Káshán, are
preserved. For the bibliography up to 1889, see vol. ii. pp. 173-211 of the
_Traveller's Narrative, written to illustrate the Episode of the Báb_, a
Persian work composed by Bahá's son, `Abbás Efendí, edited, translated and
annotated by E. G. Browne (Cambridge, 1891). More recent works
are:--Browne, _The New History of the Báb_ (Cambridge, 1893); and
"Catalogue and Description of the 27 Bábí Manuscripts," _Journal of R.
Asiat. Soc._ (July and October 1892); Andreas, _Die Bábí's in Persien_
(1896); Baron Victor Rosen, _Collections scientifiques de l'Institut des
Langues orientales_, vol. i. (1877), pp. 179-212; vol. iii. (1886), pp.
1-51; vol. vi. (1891), pp. 141-255; "Manuscrits Bâbys"; and other important
articles in Russian by the same scholar; and by Captain A. G. Toumansky in
the _Zapiski vostochnava otdyèleniya Imperatorskava Russkava
Archeologicheskava Obshchestva_ (vols. iv.-xii., St Petersburg, 1890-1900);
also an excellent edition by Toumansky, with Russian translation, notes and
introduction, of the _Kitáb-i-Aqdas_ (the most important of Bahá's works),
&c. (St Petersburg, 1899). Mention should also be made of an Arabic history
of the Bábís (unsympathetic but well-informed) written by a Persian, Mírzá
Muhammad Mahdí Khan, _Za`imu'd-Duwla_, printed in Cairo in A.H. 1321 (=
A.D. 1903-1904). Of the works composed in English for the American converts
the most important are:--_Bahá'u'lláh_ (The Glory of God), by Ibráhím
Khayru'lláh, assisted by Howard MacNutt (Chicago, 1900); _The Three
Questions_ (n.d.) and _Facts for Baháists_ (1901), by the same; _Life and
Teachings of `Abbás Efendí_, by Myron H. Phelps, with preface by E. G.
Browne (New York, 1903); Isabella Brittingham, _The Revelations of
Bahá'u'lláh, in a Sequence of Four Lessons_ (1902); Laura Clifford Burney,
_Some Answered Questions Collected_ [in Acre, 1904-1906] _and Translated
from the Persian of `Abdu'l-Bahá_ [_i.e._ `Abbás Efendí] (London, 1908). In
French, A. L. M. Nicolas (first dragoman at the French legation at Tehrán)
has published several important translations, viz. _Le Livre des sept
preuves de la mission du Báb_ (Paris, 1902); _Le Livre de la certitude_
(1904); and _Le Beyân arabe_ (1905); and there are other notable works by
H. Dreyfus, an adherent of the Bábí faith. Lastly, mention should be made
of a remarkable but scarce little tract by Gabriel Sacy, printed at Cairo
in June 1902, and entitled _Du règne de Dieu et de l'Agneau, connu sous le
nom de Babysme_.

(E. G. B.)

BABINGTON, ANTHONY (1561-1586), English conspirator, son of Henry Babington
of Dethick in Derbyshire, and of Mary, daughter of George, Lord Darcy, was
born in October 1561, and was brought up secretly a Roman Catholic. As a
youth he served at Sheffield as page to Mary queen of Scots, for whom he
early felt an ardent devotion. In 1580 he came to London, attended the
court of Elizabeth, and joined the secret society formed that year
supporting the Jesuit missionaries. In 1582 after the execution of Father
Campion he withdrew to Dethick, and attaining his majority occupied himself
for a short time with the management of his estates. Later he went abroad
and became associated at Paris with Mary's supporters who were planning her
release with the help of Spain, and on his return he was entrusted with
letters for her. In April 1586 he became, with the priest John Ballard,
leader of a plot to murder Elizabeth and her ministers, and organize a
general Roman Catholic rising in England and liberate Mary. The conspiracy
was regarded by Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador, one of its chief
instigators, and also by Walsingham, as the most dangerous of recent years;
it included, in its general purpose of destroying the government, a large
number of Roman Catholics, and had ramifications all over the country.
Philip II. of Spain, who ardently desired the success of an enterprise "so
Christian, just and advantageous to the holy Catholic faith,"[1] promised
to assist with an expedition directly the assassination of the queen was
effected. Babington's conduct was marked by open folly and vanity. Desirous
of some token of appreciation from Mary for his services, he entered into a
long correspondence with her, which was intercepted by the spies of
Walsingham. On the 4th of August Ballard was seized and betrayed his
comrades, probably under torture. Babington then applied for a passport
abroad, for the ostensible purpose of spying upon the refugees, but in
reality to organize the foreign expedition and secure his own safety. The
passport being delayed, he offered to reveal to Walsingham a dangerous
conspiracy, but the latter sent no reply, and meanwhile the ports were
closed and none allowed to leave the kingdom for some days. He was still
allowed his liberty, but one night while supping with Walsingham's servant
he observed a memorandum of the minister's concerning himself, fled to St
John's Wood, where he was joined by some of his companions, and after
disguising himself succeeded in reaching Harrow, where he was sheltered by
a recent convert to Romanism. Towards the end of August he was discovered
and imprisoned in the Tower. On the 13th and 14th of September he was tried
with Ballard and five others by a special commission, when he confessed his
guilt, but strove to place all the blame upon Ballard. All were condemned
to death for high treason. On the 19th he wrote to Elizabeth praying for
mercy, and the same day offered £1000 for procuring his pardon; and on the
20th, having disclosed the cipher used in the correspondence between
himself and Mary, he was executed [v.03 p.0096] with the usual barbarities
in Lincoln's Inn Fields. The detection of the plot led to Mary's own
destruction. There is no positive documentary proof in Mary's own hand that
she had knowledge of the intended assassination of Elizabeth, but her
circumstances, together with the tenour of her correspondence with
Babington, place her complicity beyond all reasonable doubt.

[1] _Cata. of State Papers Simancas_, iii. 606, Mendoza to Philip.

BABINGTON, CHURCHILL (1821-1889), English classical scholar and
archaeologist, was born at Roecliffe, in Leicestershire, on the 11th of
March 1821. He was educated by his father till he was seventeen, when he
was placed under the tuition of Charles Wycliffe Goodwin, the orientalist
and archaeologist. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1839, and
graduated B.A. in 1843, being seventh in the first class of the classical
tripos and a senior optime. In 1845 he obtained the Hulsean Prize for his
essay _The Influence of Christianity in promoting the Abolition of Slavery
in Europe_. In 1846 he was elected to a fellowship and took orders. He
proceeded to the degree of M.A. in 1846 and D.D. in 1879. From 1848 to 1861
he was vicar of Horningsea, near Cambridge, and from 1866 to his death on
the 12th of January 1889, vicar of Cockfield in Suffolk. From 1865 to 1880
he held the Disney professorship of archaeology at Cambridge. In his
lectures, illustrated from his own collections of coins and vases, he dealt
chiefly with Greek and Roman pottery and numismatics.

Dr Babington was a many-sided man and wrote on a variety of subjects. His
early familiarity with country life gave him a taste for natural history,
especially botany and ornithology. He was also an authority on conchology.
He was the author of the appendices on botany (in part) and ornithology in
Potter's _History and Antiquities of Charnwood Forest_ (1842); _Mr
Macaulay's Character of the Clergy ... considered_ (1849), a defence of the
clergy of the 17th century, which received the approval of Mr Gladstone,
against the strictures of Macaulay. He also brought out the _editio
princeps_ of the speeches of Hypereides _Against Demosthenes_ (1850), _On
Behalf of Lycophron and Euxenippus_ (1853), and his _Funeral Oration_
(1858). It was by his edition of these speeches from the papyri discovered
at Thebes (Egypt) in 1847 and 1856 that Babington's fame as a Greek scholar
was made. In 1855 he published an edition of _Benefizio della Morte di
Cristo_, a remarkable book of the Reformation period, attributed to
Paleario, of which nearly all the copies had been destroyed by the
Inquisition. Babington's edition was a facsimile of the _editio princeps_
published at Venice in 1543, with Introduction and French and English
versions. He also edited the first two volumes of Higden's _Polychronicon_
(1858) and Bishop Pecock's _Repressor of Overmuch Blaming of the Clergy_
(1860), undertaken at the request of the Master of the Rolls; _Introductory
Lecture on Archaeology_ (1865); _Roman Antiquities found at Rougham_
[1872]; _Catalogue of Birds of Suffolk_ (1884-1886); _Flora of Suffolk_
(with W. M. Hind, 1889), and (1855, 1865) some inscriptions found in Crete
by T. A. B. Spratt, the explorer of the island. In addition to contributing
to various classical and scientific journals, he catalogued the classical
MSS. in the University Library and the Greek and English coins in the
Fitzwilliam museum.

[Illustration: Old Male Babirusa (_Babirusa alfurus_).]

BABIRUSA ("pig-deer"), the Malay name of the wild swine of Celebes and
Buru, which has been adopted in zoology as the scientific designation of
this remarkable animal (the only representative of its genus), in the form
of _Babirusa alfurus_. The skin is nearly naked, and very rough and rugged.
The total number of teeth is 34, with the formula _i.2/3. c.1/1. p.2/3.
m.3/3._ The molars, and more especially the last, are smaller and simpler
than in the pigs of the genus _Sus_, but the peculiarity of this genus is
the extraordinary development of the canines, or tusks, of the male. These
teeth are ever-growing, long, slender and curved, and without enamel. Those
of the upper jaw are directed upwards from their bases, so that they never
enter the mouth, but pierce the skin of the face, thus resembling horns
rather than teeth; they curve backwards, downwards, and finally often
forwards again, almost or quite touching the forehead. Dr A. R. Wallace
remarks that "it is difficult to understand what can be the use of these
horn-like teeth. Some of the old writers supposed that they served as hooks
by which the creature could rest its head on a branch. But the way in which
they usually diverge just over and in front of the eye has suggested the
more probable idea, that they serve to guard these organs from thorns and
spines while hunting for fallen fruits among the tangled thickets of
rattans and other spiny plants. Even this, however, is not satisfactory,
for the female, who must seek her food in the same way, does not possess
them. I should be inclined to believe rather that these tusks were once
useful, and were then worn down as fast as they grew, but that changed
conditions of life have rendered them unnecessary, and they now develop
into a monstrous form, just as the incisors of the beaver and rabbit will
go on growing if the opposite teeth do not wear them away. In old animals
they reach an enormous size, and are generally broken off as if by
fighting." On this latter view we may regard the tusks of the male babirusa
as examples of redundant development, analogous to that of the single pair
of lower teeth in some of the beaked whales. Unlike ordinary wild pigs, the
babirusa produces uniformly coloured young. (See SWINE.)

(R. L.*)

BABOON (from the Fr. _babuin_, which is itself derived from _Babon_, the
Egyptian deity to whom it was sacred), properly the designation of the
long-muzzled, medium-tailed Egyptian monkey, scientifically known as _Papio
anubis_; in a wider sense applied to all the members of the genus _Papio_
(formerly known as _Cynocephalus_) now confined to Africa and Arabia,
although in past times extending into India. Baboons are for the most part
large terrestrial monkeys with short or medium-sized tails, and long naked
dog-like muzzles, in the truncated extremity of which are pierced the
nostrils. As a rule, they frequent barren rocky districts in large droves,
and are exceedingly fierce and dangerous to approach. They have large
cheek-pouches, large naked callosities, often brightly coloured, on the
buttocks, and short thick limbs, adapted rather to walking than to
climbing. Their diet includes practically everything eatable they can
capture or kill. The typical representative of the genus is the yellow
baboon (_P. cynocephalus_, or _babuin_), distinguished by its small size
and grooved muzzle, and ranging from Abyssinia to the Zambezi. The
above-mentioned anubis baboon, _P. anubis_ (with the subspecies _neumanni_,
_pruinosus_, _heuglini_ and _doguera_), ranging from Egypt all through
tropical Africa, together with _P. sphinx_, _P. olivaceus_, the Abyssinian
_P. lydekkeri_, and the chacma, _P. porcarius_ of the Cape, represent the
subgenus _Choeropithecus_. The named Arabian baboon, _P. hamadryas_ of
North Africa and Arabia, dedicated by the ancient Egyptians to the god
Thoth, and the South Arabian _P. arabicus_, typify _Hamadryas_; while the
drill and mandrill of the west coast, _P. leucophaeus_ and _P. maimon_,
constitute the subgenus _Maimon_. The anubis baboons, as shown by the
frescoes, were tamed by the ancient Egyptians and trained to pluck
sycamore-figs from the trees. (See PRIMATES; CHACMA; DRILL; GELADA and
MANDRILL).

(R. L.*)

BABRIUS, author of a collection of fables written in Greek. Practically
nothing is known of him. He is supposed to have been a Roman, whose gentile
name was possibly Valerius, living in the East, probably in Syria, where
the fables seem first [v.03 p.0097] to have gained popularity. The address
to "a son of King Alexander" has caused much speculation, with the result
that dates varying between the 3rd century B.C. and the 3rd century A.D.
have been assigned to Babrius. The Alexander referred to may have been
Alexander Severus (A.D. 222-235), who was fond of having literary men of
all kinds about his court. "The son of Alexander" has further been
identified with a certain Branchus mentioned in the fables, and it is
suggested that Babrius may have been his tutor; probably, however, Branchus
is a purely fictitious name. There is no mention of Babrius in ancient
writers before the beginning of the 3rd century A.D., and his language and
style seem to show that he belonged to that period. The first critic who
made Babrius more than a mere name was Richard Bentley, in his
_Dissertation on the Fables of Aesop_. In a careful examination of these
prose Aesopian fables, which had been handed down in various collections
from the time of Maximus Planudes, Bentley discovered traces of
versification, and was able to extract a number of verses which he assigned
to Babrius. Tyrwhitt (_De Babrio_, 1776) followed up the researches of
Bentley, and for some time the efforts of scholars were directed towards
reconstructing the metrical original of the prose fables. In 1842 M. Minas,
a Greek, the discoverer of the _Philosophoumena_ of Hippolytus, came upon a
MS. of Babrius in the convent of St Laura on Mount Athos, now in the
British Museum. This MS. contained 123 fables out of the supposed original
number, 160. They are arranged alphabetically, but break off at the letter
O. The fables are written in choliambic, _i.e._ limping or imperfect iambic
verse, having a spondee as the last foot, a metre originally appropriated
to satire. The style is extremely good, the expression being terse and
pointed, the versification correct and elegant, and the construction of the
stories is fully equal to that in the prose versions. The genuineness of
this collection of the fables was generally admitted by scholars. In 1857
Minas professed to have discovered at Mount Athos another MS. containing 94
fables and a preface. As the monks refused to sell this MS., he made a copy
of it, which was sold to the British Museum, and was published in 1859 by
Sir G. Cornewall Lewis. This, however, was soon proved to be a forgery. Six
more fables were brought to light by P. Knöll from a Vatican MS. (edited by
A. Eberhard, _Analecta Babriana_, 1879).

EDITIONS.--Boissonade (1844); Lachmann (1845); Schneider (1853); Eberhard
(1876); Gitlbauer (1882); Rutherford (1883); Knöll, _Fabularum Babrianarum
Paraphrasis Bodleiana_ (1877); Feuillet (1890); Desrousseaux (1890);
Passerat (1892); Croiset (1892); Crusius (1897). See also Mantels, _Über
die Fabeln des B._ (1840); Crusius, _De Babrii Aetate_ (1879); Ficus, _De
Babrii Vita_ (1889); J. Weiner, _Quaestiones Babrianae_ (1891); Conington,
_Miscellaneous Writings_, ii. 460-491; Marchiano, _Babrio_ (1899); Fusci,
_Babrio_ (1901); Christoffersson, _Studia de Fabulis Babrianis_ (1901).
There are translations in English by Davies (1860) and in French by Levèque
(1890), and in many other languages.

BABU, a native Indian clerk. The word is really a term of respect attached
to a proper name, like "master" or "Mr," and _Babu-ji_ is still used in
many parts of India, meaning "sir"; but without the suffix the word itself
is now generally used contemptuously as signifying a semi-literate native,
with a mere veneer of modern education.

BABY-FARMING,[1] a term meaning generally the taking in of infants to nurse
for payment, but usually with an implication of improper treatment.
Previous to the year 1871 the abuse of the practice of baby-farming in
England had grown to an alarming extent, while the trials of Margaret
Waters and Mary Hall called attention to the infamous relations between the
lying-in houses and the baby-farming houses of London. The evil was, no
doubt, largely connected with the question of illegitimacy, for there was a
wide-spread existence of baby-farms where children were received without
question on payment of a lump sum. Such children were nearly all
illegitimate, and in these cases it was to the pecuniary advantage of the
baby-farmer to hasten the death of the child. It had become also the
practice for factory operatives and mill-hands to place out their children
by the day, and since in many cases the children were looked upon as a
burden and a drain on their parents' resources, too particular inquiry was
not always made as to the mode in which the children were cared for. The
form was gone through too of paying a ridiculously insufficient sum for the
maintenance of the child. In 1871 the House of Commons found it necessary
to appoint a select committee "to inquire as to the best means of
preventing the destruction of the lives of infants put out to nurse for
hire by their parents." "Improper and insufficient food," said the
committee, "opiates, drugs, crowded rooms, bad air, want of cleanliness,
and wilful neglect are sure to be followed in a few months by diarrhoea,
convulsions and wasting away." These unfortunate children were nearly all
illegitimate, and the mere fact of their being hand-nursed, and not
breast-nursed, goes some way (according to the experience of the Foundling
hospital and the Magdalene home) to explain the great mortality among them.
Such children, when nursed by their mothers in the workhouse, generally
live. The practical result of the committee of 1871 was the act of 1872,
which provided for the compulsory registration of all houses in which more
than one child under the age of one year were received for a longer period
than twenty-four hours. No licence was granted by the justices of the
peace, unless the house was suitable for the purpose, and its owner a
person of good character and able to maintain the children. Offences
against the act, including wilful neglect of the children even in a
suitable house, were punishable by a fine of £5 or six months' imprisonment
with or without hard labour. In 1896 a select committee of the House of
Lords sat and reported on the working of this act. In consequence of this
report the act of 1872 was repealed and superseded by the Infant Life
Protection Act 1897, which did away with the system of registration and
substituted for it one of notice to a supervening authority. By the act all
persons retaining or receiving for hire more than one infant under the age
of _five_ had to give written notice of the fact to the local authority.
The local authorities were empowered to appoint inspectors, and required to
arrange for the periodical inspection of infants so taken in, while they
could also fix the number of infants which might be retained. By a special
clause any person receiving an infant under the age of two years for a sum
of money not exceeding twenty pounds had to give notice of the fact to the
local authority. If any infants were improperly kept, the inspector might
obtain an order for their removal to a work-house or place of safety until
restored to their parents or guardians, or otherwise legally disposed of.
The act of 1897 was repealed and amended by the Children Act 1908, which
codified the law relating to children, and added many new provisions. This
act is dealt with in the article CHILDREN, LAW RELATING TO.

In the United States the law is noticeably strict in most states. In
Massachusetts, a law of 1891 directs that "every person who receives for
board, or for the purpose of procuring adoption, an infant under the age of
three years shall use diligence to ascertain whether or not such infant is
illegitimate, and if he knows or has reason to believe it to be
illegitimate shall forthwith notify the State Board of Charity of the fact
of such reception; and said board and its officers or agents may enter and
inspect any building where they may have reason to believe that any such
illegitimate infant is boarded, and remove such infant when, in their
judgment, such removal is necessary by reason of neglect, abuse or other
causes, in order to preserve the infant's life, and such infant so removed
shall be in the custody of said Board of Charity, which shall make
provision therefor according to law." The penal code of the state of New
York requires a licence for baby-farming to be issued by the board of
health of the city or town where such children are boarded or kept, and
"every person so licensed must keep a register wherein he shall enter the
names and ages of all such children, and of all children born on such
premises, and the names and residences of their parents, as far as known,
the time of reception and the discharge of such children, and the reasons
therefor, and also a correct register of every child under five years of
age who is given out, adopted, taken away, or indentured from such place
[v.03 p.0098] to or by any one, together with the name and residence of the
person so adopting" (Pen. Code, § 288, subsec. 4).

Persons neglecting children may be prosecuted under § 289 of the N.Y. penal
code, which provides that any person who "wilfully causes or permits the
life or limb of any child, actually or apparently under the age of sixteen
years, to be endangered, or its health to be injured, or its morals to
become depraved ... is guilty of a misdemeanour."

In Australia particular care has been taken by most of the states to
prevent the evils of baby-farming. In South Australia there is a State
Children's Council, which, under the State Children Act of 1895, has large
powers with respect to the oversight of infants under two years boarded out
by their mother. "Foster-mothers," as the women who take in infants as
boarders are called, must be licensed, while the number of children
authorized to be kept by the foster-mother is fixed by licence; every
licensed foster-mother must keep a register containing the name, age and
place of birth of every child received by her, the names, addresses and
description of the parents, or of any person other than the parents from or
to whom the child was received or delivered over, the date of receipt or
delivery over, particulars of any accident to or illness of the child, and
the name of the medical practitioner (if any) by whom attended. In New
South Wales the Children's Protection Act of 1892, with the amendments of
1902, requires the same state supervision over the homes in which children
are boarded out, with licensing of foster-mothers. In Victoria an act was
passed in 1890 for "making better provision for the protection of infant
life." In New Zealand, there is legislation to the same effect by the
"Adoption of Children Act 1895" and the "Infant Life Protection Act 1896."

[1] Baby is a diminutive or pet form of "babe," now chiefly used in poetry
or scriptural language. "Babe" is probably a form of the earlier _baban_, a
reduplicated form of the infant sound _ba_.

BABYLON (mod. _Hillah_), an ancient city on the left bank of the Euphrates,
about 70 m. S. of Bagdad. "Babylon" is the Greek form of Babel or Bab-ili,
"the gate of the god" (sometimes incorrectly written "of the gods"), which
again is the Semitic translation of the original Sumerian name Ka-dimirra.
The god was probably Merodach or Marduk (_q.v._), the divine patron of the
city. In an inscription of the Kassite conqueror Gaddas the name appears as
Ba-ba-lam, as if from the Assyrian _babalu_, "to bring"; another foreign
_Volksetymologie_ is found in Genesis xi. 9, from _balbal_, "to confound."
A second name of the city, which perhaps originally denoted a separate
village or quarter, was Su-anna, and in later inscriptions it is often
represented ideographically by E-ki, the pronunciation and meaning of which
are uncertain. One of its oldest names, however, was Din-tir, of which the
poets were especially fond; Din-tir signifies in Sumerian "the life of the
forest," though a native lexicon translates it "seat of life." Uru-azagga,
"the holy city," was also a title sometimes applied to Babylon as to other
cities in Babylonia. Ka-dimirra, the Semitic Bab-ili, probably denoted at
first E-Saggila, "the house of the lofty head," the temple dedicated to
Bel-Merodach, along with its immediate surroundings. Like the other great
sanctuaries of Babylonia the temple had been founded in pre-Semitic times,
and the future Babylon grew up around it. Since Merodach was the son of Ea,
the culture god of Eridu near Ur on the Persian Gulf, it is possible that
Babylon was a colony of Eridu. Adjoining Babylon was a town called Borsippa
(_q.v._).

The earliest mention of Babylon is in a dated tablet of the reign of Sargon
of Akkad (3800 B.C.), who is stated to have built sanctuaries there to
Anunit and A[=e] (or Ea), and H. Winckler may be right in restoring a
mutilated passage in the annals of this king so as to make it mean that
Babylon owed its name to Sargon, who made it the capital of his empire. If
so, it fell back afterwards into the position of a mere provincial town and
remained so for centuries, until it became the capital of "the first
dynasty of Babylon" and then of Khammurabi's empire (2250 B.C.). From this
time onward it continued to be the capital of Babylonia and the holy city
of western Asia. The claim to supremacy in Asia, however real in fact, was
not admitted _de jure_ until the claimant had "taken the hands" of
Bel-Merodach at Babylon, and thereby been accepted as his adopted son and
the inheritor of the old Babylonian empire. It was this which made
Tiglath-pileser III. and other Assyrian kings so anxious to possess
themselves of Babylon and so to legitimize their power. Sennacherib alone
seems to have failed in securing the support of the Babylonian priesthood;
at all events he never underwent the ceremony, and Babylonia throughout his
reign was in a constant state of revolt which was finally suppressed only
by the complete destruction of the capital. In 689 B.C. its walls, temples
and palaces were razed to the ground and the rubbish thrown into the
Arakhtu, the canal which bordered the earlier Babylon on the south. The act
shocked the religious conscience of western Asia; the subsequent murder of
Sennacherib was held to be an expiation of it, and his successor
Esar-haddon hastened to rebuild the old city, to receive there his crown,
and make it his residence during part of the year. On his death Babylonia
was left to his elder son Samas-sum-yukin, who eventually headed a revolt
against his brother Assur-bani-pal of Assyria. Once more Babylon was
besieged by the Assyrians and starved into surrender. Assur-bani-pal
purified the city and celebrated a "service of reconciliation," but did not
venture to "take the hands" of Bel. In the subsequent overthrow of the
Assyrian empire the Babylonians saw another example of divine vengeance.

With the recovery of Babylonian independence under Nabopolassar a new era
of architectural activity set in, and his son Nebuchadrezzar made Babylon
one of the wonders of the ancient world. It surrendered without a struggle
to Cyrus, but two sieges in the reign of Darius Hystaspis, and one in the
reign of Xerxes, brought about the destruction of the defences, while the
monotheistic rule of Persia allowed the temples to fall into decay. Indeed
part of the temple of E-Saggila, which like other ancient temples served as
a fortress, was intentionally pulled down by Xerxes after his capture of
the city. Alexander was murdered in the palace of Nebuchadrezzar, which
must therefore have been still standing, and cuneiform texts show that,
even under the Seleucids, E-Saggila was not wholly a ruin. The foundation
of Seleucia in its neighbourhood, however, drew away the population of the
old city and hastened its material decay. A tablet dated 275 B.C. states
that on the 12th of Nisan the inhabitants of Babylon were transported to
the new town, where a palace was built as well as a temple to which the
ancient name of E-Saggila was given. With this event the history of Babylon
comes practically to an end, though more than a century later we find
sacrifices being still performed in its old sanctuary.

Our knowledge of its topography is derived from the classical writers, the
inscriptions of Nebuchadrezzar, and the excavations of the _Deutsche
Orientgesellschaft_, which were begun in 1899. The topography is
necessarily that of the Babylon of Nebuchadrezzar; the older Babylon which
was destroyed by Sennacherib having left few, if any, traces behind. Most
of the existing remains lie on the E. bank of the Euphrates, the principal
being three vast mounds, the _Babil_ to the north, the _Qasr_ or "Palace"
(also known as the _Mujelliba_) in the centre, and the Ish[=a]n `Amran ibn
`Ali, with the outlying spur of the Jumjuma, to the south. Eastward of
these come the Ish[=a]n el-Aswad or "Black Mound" and three lines of
rampart, one of which encloses the _Babil_ mound on the N. and E. sides,
while a third forms a triangle with the S.E. angle of the other two. W. of
the Euphrates are other ramparts and the remains of the ancient Borsippa.

We learn from Herodotus and Ctesias that the city was built on both sides
of the river in the form of a square, and enclosed within a double row of
lofty walls to which Ctesias adds a third. Ctesias makes the outermost wall
360 stades (42 m.) in circumference, while according to Herodotus it
measured 480 stades (56 m.), which would include an area of about 200 sq.
m. The estimate of Ctesias is essentially the same as that of Q. Curtius
(v. 1. 26), 368 stades, and Clitarchus (_ap._ Diod. Sic. ii. 7), 365
stades; Strabo (xvi. 1. 5) makes it 385 stades. But even the estimate of
Ctesias, assuming the stade to be its usual length, would imply an area of
about 100 sq. m. According to Herodotus the height of the walls was about
335 ft. and their width 85 ft; [v.03 p.0099] according to Ctesias the
height was about 300 ft. The measurements seem exaggerated, but we must
remember that even in Xenophon's time (_Anab._ iii. 4. 10) the ruined wall
of Nineveh was still 150 ft high, and that the spaces between the 250
towers of the wall of Babylon (Ctes. 417, _ap._ Diod. ii. 7) were broad
enough to let a four-horse chariot turn (Herod. i. 179). The clay dug from
the moat served to make the bricks of the wall, which had 100 gates, all of
bronze, with bronze lintels and posts. The two inner enclosures were faced
with enamelled tiles and represented hunting-scenes. Two other walls ran
along the banks of the Euphrates and the quays with which it was lined,
each containing 25 gates which answered to the number of streets they led
into. Ferry-boats plied between the landing-places of the gates, and a
movable drawbridge (30 ft. broad), supported on stone piers, joined the two
parts of the city together.

The account thus given of the walls must be grossly exaggerated and cannot
have been that of an eye-witness. Moreover, the two walls--Imgur-Bel, the
inner wall, and Nimitti-Bel, the outer--which enclosed the city proper on
the site of the older Babylon have been confused with the outer ramparts
(enclosing the whole of Nebuchadrezzar's city), the remains of which can
still be traced to the east. According to Nebuchadrezzar, Imgur-Bel was
built in the form of a square, each side of which measured "30 _aslu_ by
the great cubit"; this would be equivalent, if Professor F. Hommel is
right, to 2400 metres. Four thousand cubits to the east the great rampart
was built "mountain high," which surrounded both the old and the new town;
it was provided with a moat, and a reservoir was excavated in the triangle
on the inner side of its south-east corner, the western wall of which is
still visible. The Imgur-Bel of Sargon's time has been discovered by the
German excavators running south of the _Qasr_ from the Euphrates to the
Gate of Ishtar.

The German excavations have shown that the _Qasr_ mound represents both the
old palace of Nabopolassar, and the new palace adjoining it built by
Nebuchadrezzar, the wall of which he boasts of having completed in 15 days.
They have also laid bare the site of the "Gate of Ishtar" on the east side
of the mound and the little temple of Nin-Makh (Beltis) beyond it, as well
as the raised road for solemn processions (_A-ibur-sabu_) which led from
the Gate of Ishtar to E-Saggila and skirted the east side of the palace.
The road was paved with stone and its walls on either side lined with
enamelled tiles, on which a procession of lions is represented. North of
the mound was a canal, which seems to have been the Libilkhegal of the
inscriptions, while on the south side was the Arakhtu, "the river of
Babylon," the brick quays of which were built by Nabopolassar.

The site of E-Saggila is still uncertain. The German excavators assign it
to the `Amr[=a]n mound, its tower having stood in a depression immediately
to the north of this, and so place it south of the _Qasr_; but E. Lindl and
F. Hommel have put forward strong reasons for considering it to have been
north of the latter, on a part of the site which has not yet been explored.
A tablet copied by George Smith gives us interesting details as to the plan
and dimensions of this famous temple of Bel; a plan based on these will be
found in Hommel's _Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des alten
Orients_, p. 321. There were three courts, the outer or great court, the
middle court of Ishtar and Zamama, and the inner court on the east side of
which was the tower of seven stages (known as the House of the Foundation
of Heaven and Earth), 90 metres high according to Hommel's calculation of
the measurements in the tablet; while on the west side was the temple
proper of Merodach and his wife Sarpanit or Zarpanit, as well as chapels of
Anu, Ea and Bel on either side of it. A winding ascent led to the summit of
the tower, where there was a chapel, containing, according to Herodotus, a
couch and golden table (for the showbread) but no image. The golden image
of Merodach 40 ft. high, stood in the temple below, in the sanctuary called
E-Kua or "House of the Oracle," together with a table, a mercy-seat and an
altar--all of gold. The deities whose chapels were erected within the
precincts of the temple enclosure were regarded as forming his court.
Fifty-five of these chapels existed altogether in Babylon, but some of them
stood independently in other parts of the city.

There are numerous gates in the walls both of E-Saggila and of the city,
the names of many of which are now known. Nebuchadrezzar says that he
covered the walls of some of them with blue enamelled tiles "on which bulls
and dragons were pourtrayed," and that he set up large bulls and serpents
of bronze on their thresholds.

The _Babil_ mound probably represents the site of a palace built by
Nebuchadrezzar at the northern extremity of the city walls and attached to
a defensive outwork 60 cubits in length. Since H. Rassam found remains of
irrigation works here it might well be the site of the Hanging Gardens.
These consisted, we are told, of a garden of trees and flowers, built on
the topmost of a series of arches some 75 ft. high, and in the form of a
square, each side of which measured 400 Greek ft. Water was raised from the
Euphrates by means of a screw (Strabo xvi. 1. 5; Diod. ii. 10. 6). In the
Jumjuma mound at the southern extremity of the old city the contract and
other business tablets of the Egibi firm were found.

See C. J. Rich, _Memoir on the Ruins of Babylon_ (1816), and _Collected
Memoirs_ (1839); A. H. Layard, _Nineveh and Babylon_ (1853); C. P. Tiele,
_De Hoofdtempel van Babel_ (1886); A. H. Sayce, _Religion of the Ancient
Babylonians_, App. ii. (1887); C. J. Ball in _Records of the Past_ (new
ser. iii. 1890); _Mittheilungen der deutschen Orientgesellschaft_
(1899-1906); F. Delitzsch, _Im Lande des einstigen Paradieses_ (1903);
F. H. Weissbach, _Das Stadtbild von Babylon_ (1904); F. Hommel, _Grundriss
der Geographie und Geschichte des alten Orients_ (1904).

(A. H. S.)

BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA. I. _Geography._--Geographically as well as
ethnologically and historically, the whole district enclosed between the
two great rivers of western Asia, the Tigris and Euphrates, forms but one
country. The writers of antiquity clearly recognized this fact, speaking of
the whole under the general name of Assyria, though Babylonia, as will be
seen, would have been a more accurate designation. It naturally falls into
two divisions, the northern being more or less mountainous, while the
southern is flat and marshy; the near approach of the two rivers to one
another, at a spot where the undulating plateau of the north sinks suddenly
into the Babylonian alluvium, tends to separate them still more completely.
In the earliest times of which we have any record, the northern portion was
included in Mesopotamia; it was definitely marked off as Assyria only after
the rise of the Assyrian monarchy. With the exception of Assur, the
original capital, the chief cities of the country, Nineveh, Calah and
Arbela, were all on the left bank of the Tigris. The reason of this
preference for the eastern bank of the Tigris was due to its abundant
supply of water, whereas the great Mesopotamian plain on the western side
had to depend upon the streams which flowed into the Euphrates. This vast
flat, the modern El-Jezireh, is about 250 miles in length, interrupted only
by a single limestone range, rising abruptly out of the plain, and
branching off from the Zagros mountains under the names of _Saraz[=u]r_,
_Hamrin_ and _Sinjar_. The numerous remains of old habitations show how
thickly this level tract must once have been peopled, though now for the
most part a wilderness. North of the plateau rises a well-watered and
undulating belt of country, into which run low ranges of limestone hills,
sometimes arid, sometimes covered with dwarf-oak, and often shutting in,
between their northern and north-eastern flank and the main mountain-line
from which they detach themselves, rich plains and fertile valleys. Behind
them tower the massive ridges of the Niphates and Zagros ranges, where the
Tigris and Euphrates take their rise, and which cut off Assyria from
Armenia and Kurdistan.

The name Assyria itself was derived from that of the city of Assur (_q.v._)
or Asur, now Qal`at Sherqat (Kaleh Shergat), which stood on the right bank
of the Tigris, midway between the Greater and the Lesser Zab. It remained
the capital long after the Assyrians had become the dominant power in
western Asia, but was finally supplanted by Calah (_Nimr[=u]d_), Nineveh
(_Nebi Yunus_ and _Kuyunjik_), and Dur-Sargina (_Khorsabad_), some 60 m.
farther north (see NINEVEH).

In contrast with the arid plateau of Mesopotamia, stretched the [v.03
p.0100] rich alluvial plain of Chaldaea, formed by the deposits of the two
great rivers by which it was enclosed. The soil was extremely fertile, and
teemed with an industrious population. Eastward rose the mountains of Elam,
southward were the sea-marshes and the Kald[=a] or Chaldaeans and other
Aramaic tribes, while on the west the civilization of Babylonia encroached
beyond the banks of the Euphrates, upon the territory of the Semitic nomads
(or Suti). Here stood Ur (_Mugheir_, more correctly _Muqayyar_) the
earliest capital of the country; and Babylon, with its suburb, Borsippa
(_Birs Nimr[=u]d_), as well as the two Sipparas (the Sepharvaim of
Scripture, now _Abu Habba_), occupied both the Arabian and Chaldaean sides
of the river (see BABYLON). The Arakhtu, or "river of Babylon," flowed past
the southern side of the city, and to the south-west of it on the Arabian
bank lay the great inland freshwater sea of _Nejef_, surrounded by red
sandstone cliffs of considerable height, 40 m. in length and 35 in breadth
in the widest part. Above and below this sea, from Borsippa to Kufa, extend
the famous Chaldaean marshes, where Alexander was nearly lost (Arrian,
_Exp. Al._ vii. 22; Strab. xvi. 1, § 12); but these depend upon the state
of the Hindiya canal, disappearing altogether when it is closed.

Eastward of the Euphrates and southward of Sippara, Kutha and Babylon were
Kis (_Uhaimir_, 9 m. E. of _Hillah_), Nippur (_Niffer_)--where stood the
great sanctuary of El-lil, the older Bel--Uruk or Erech (_Warka_) and Larsa
(_Senkera_) with its temple of the sun-god, while eastward of the Shatt
el-Hai, probably the ancient channel of the Tigris, was Lagash (_Tello_),
which played an important part in early Babylonian history. The primitive
seaport of the country, Eridu, the seat of the worship of Ea the
culture-god, was a little south of Ur (at _Abu Shahrain_ or _Now[=a]wis_ on
the west side of the Euphrates). It is now about 130 m. distant from the
sea; as about 46 m. of land have been formed by the silting up of the shore
since the foundation of Spasinus Charax (_Muhamrah_) in the time of
Alexander the Great, or some 115 ft. a year, the city would have been in
existence at least 6000 years ago. The marshes in the south like the
adjoining desert were frequented by Aramaic tribes; of these the most
famous were the Kald[=a] or Chaldaeans who under Merodach-baladan made
themselves masters of Babylon and gave their name in later days to the
whole population of the country. The combined stream of the Euphrates and
Tigris as it flowed through the marshes was known to the Babylonians as the
_n[=a]r marrati_, "the salt river" (cp. Jer. l. 21), a name originally
applied to the Persian Gulf.

The alluvial plain of Babylonia was called Edin, the Eden of Gen. ii.,
though the name was properly restricted to "the plain" on the western bank
of the river where the Bedouins pastured the flocks of their Babylonian
masters. This "bank" or _kisad_, together with the corresponding western
bank of the Tigris (according to Hommel the modern Shatt el-Hai), gave its
name to the land of Chesed, whence the _Kasdim_ of the Old Testament. In
the early inscriptions of Lagash the whole district is known as Gu-Edinna,
the Sumerian equivalent of the Semitic _Kisad Edini_. The coast-land was
similarly known as Gu-[=a]bba (Semitic _Kisad tamtim_), the "bank of the
sea." A more comprehensive name of southern Babylonia was Kengi, "the
land," or Kengi Sumer, "the land of Sumer," for which Sumer alone came
afterwards to be used. Sumer has been supposed to be the original of the
Biblical Shinar; but Shinar represented northern rather than southern
Babylonia, and was probably the Sankhar of the Tell el-Amarna tablets (but
see SUMER). Opposed to Kengi and Sumer were Urra (Uri) and Akkad or
northern Babylonia. The original meaning of _Urra_ was perhaps "clayey
soil," but it came to signify "the upper country" or "highlands," _kengi_
being "the lowlands." In Semitic times _Urra_ was pronounced _Uri_ and
confounded with _uru_, "city"; as a geographical term, however, it was
replaced by Akkadu (Akkad), the Semitic form of Agad[=e]--written Akkattim
in the Elamite inscriptions--the name of the elder Sargon's capital, which
must have stood close to Sippara, if indeed it was not a quarter of Sippara
itself. The rise of Sargon's empire was doubtless the cause of this
extension of the name of Akkad; from henceforward, in the imperial title,
"Sumer and Akkad" denoted the whole of Babylonia. After the Kassite
conquest of the country, northern Babylonia came to be known as
Kar-Duniyas, "the wall of the god Duniyas," from a line of fortification
similar to that built by Nebuchadrezzar between Sippara and Opis, so as to
defend his kingdom from attacks from the north. As this last was "the Wall
of Semiramis" mentioned by Strabo (xi. 14. 8), Kar-Duniyas may have
represented the Median Wall of Xenophon (_Anab._ ii. 4. 12), traces of
which were found by F. R. Chesney extending from Faluja to Jibbar.

The country was thickly studded with towns, the sites of which are still
represented by mounds, though the identification of most of them is still
doubtful. The latest to be identified are Bismya, between Nippur and Erech,
which recent American excavations have proved to be the site of Udab (also
called Adab and Usab) and the neighbouring F[=a]ra, the site of the ancient
Kisurra. The dense population was due to the elaborate irrigation of the
Babylonian plain which had originally reclaimed it from a pestiferous and
uninhabitable swamp and had made it the most fertile country in the world.
The science of irrigation and engineering seems to have been first created
in Babylonia, which was covered by a network of canals, all skilfully
planned and regulated. The three chief of them carried off the waters of
the Euphrates to the Tigris above Babylon,--the Zabzallat canal (or _Nahr
Sarsar_) running from Faluja to Ctesiphon, the Kutha canal from Sippara to
Madain, passing Tell Ibrahim or Kutha on the way, and the King's canal or
Ar-Malcha between the other two. This last, which perhaps owed its name to
Khammurabi, was conducted from the Euphrates towards Upi or Opis, which has
been shown by H. Winckler (_Altorientalische Forschungen_, ii. pp. 509
seq.) to have been close to Seleucia on the western side of the Tigris. The
Pallacopas, called Pallukkatu in the Neo-Babylonian texts, started from
Pallukkatu or Faluja, and running parallel to the western bank of the
Euphrates as far as Iddaratu or Teredon (?) watered an immense tract of
land and supplied a large lake near Borsippa. B. Meissner may be right in
identifying it with "the Canal of the Sun-god" of the early texts. Thanks
to this system of irrigation the cultivation of the soil was highly
advanced in Babylonia. According to Herodotus (i. 193) wheat commonly
returned two hundred-fold to the sower, and occasionally three
hundred-fold. Pliny (_H. N._ xviii. 17) states that it was cut twice, and
afterwards was good keep for sheep, and Berossus remarked that wheat,
sesame, barley, ochrys, palms, apples and many kinds of shelled fruit grew
wild, as wheat still does in the neighbourhood of Anah. A Persian poem
celebrated the 360 uses of the palm (Strabo xvi. 1. 14), and Ammianus
Marcellinus (xxiv. 3) says that from the point reached by Julian's army to
the shores of the Persian Gulf was one continuous forest of verdure.

II. _Classical Authorities_.--Such a country was naturally fitted to be a
pioneer of civilization. Before the decipherment of the cuneiform texts our
knowledge of its history, however, was scanty and questionable. Had the
native history of Berossus survived, this would not have been the case; all
that is known of the Chaldaean historian's work, however, is derived from
quotations in Josephus, Ptolemy, Eusebius and the Syncellus. The
authenticity of his list of 10 antediluvian kings who reigned for 120
_sari_ or 432,000 years, has been partially confirmed by the inscriptions;
but his 8 postdiluvian dynasties are difficult to reconcile with the
monuments, and the numbers attached to them are probably corrupt. It is
different with the 7th and 8th dynasties as given by Ptolemy in the
_Almagest_, which prove to have been faithfully recorded:--

   1. Nabonassar (747 B.C.)             14 years
   2. Nadios                             2 "
   3. Khinziros and Poros (Pul)          5 "
   4. Ilulaeos                           5 "
   5. Mardokempados (Merodach-Baladan)  12 "
   6. Arkeanos (Sargon)                  5 "
   7. Interregnum                        2 "
   8. Hagisa                             1 month
   9. Belibos (702 B.C.)                 3 years
  10. Assaranadios (Assur-nadin-sum)     6 "
  [v.03 p.0101]
  11. R[=e]gebelos                       1 year
  12. M[=e]sesimordakos                  4 years
  13. Interregnum                        8 "
  14. Asaridinos (Esar-haddon)          13 "
  15. Saosdukhinos (Savul-sum-yukin)    20 "
  16. Sin[=e]ladanos (Assur-bani-pal)   22 "

The account of Babylon given by Herodotus is not that of an eye-witness,
and his historical notices are meagre and untrustworthy. He was
controverted by Ctesias, who, however, has mistaken mythology for history,
and Greek romance owed to him its Ninus and Semiramis, its Ninyas and
Sardanapalus. The only ancient authority of value on Babylonian and
Assyrian history is the Old Testament.

III. _Modern Discovery._--The excavations of P. E. Botta and A. H. Layard
at Nineveh opened up a new world, coinciding as they did with the
successful decipherment of the cuneiform system of writing. Layard's
discovery of the library of Assur-bani-pal put the materials for
reconstructing the ancient life and history of Assyria and Babylonia into
the hands of scholars. He also was the first to excavate in Babylonia,
where C. J. Rich had already done useful topographical work. Layard's
excavations in this latter country were continued by W. K. Loftus, who also
opened trenches at Susa, as well as by J. Oppert on behalf of the French
government. But it was only in the last quarter of the 19th century that
anything like systematic exploration was attempted. After the death of
George Smith at Aleppo in 1876, an expedition was sent by the British
Museum (1877-1879), under the conduct of Hormuzd Rassam, to continue his
work at Nineveh and its neighbourhood. Excavations in the mounds of
Balaw[=a]t, called Imgur-Bel by the Assyrians, 15 m. east of Mosul,
resulted in the discovery of a small temple dedicated to the god of dreams
by Assur-nazir-pal III. (883 B.C.), containing a stone coffer or ark in
which were two inscribed tables of alabaster of rectangular shape, as well
as of a palace which had been destroyed by the Babylonians but restored by
Shalmaneser II. (858 B.C.). From the latter came the bronze gates with
hammered reliefs, which are now in the British Museum. The remains of a
palace of Assur-nazir-pal III. at Nimr[=u]d (Calah) were also excavated,
and hundreds of enamelled tiles were disinterred. Two years later
(1880-1881) Rassam was sent to Babylonia, where he discovered the site of
the temple of the sun-god of Sippara at Abu-Habba, and so fixed the
position of the two Sipparas or Sepharvaim. Abu-Habba lies south-west of
Bagdad, midway between the Euphrates and Tigris, on the south side of a
canal, which may once have represented the main stream of the Euphrates,
Sippara of the goddess Anunit, now _D[=e]r_, being on its opposite bank.

Meanwhile (1877-1881) the French consul, de Sarzec, had been excavating at
Tello, the ancient Lagash, and bringing to light monuments of the
pre-Semitic age, which included the diorite statues of Gudea now in the
Louvre, the stone of which, according to the inscriptions upon them, had
been brought from Magan, the Sinaitic peninsula. The subsequent excavations
of de Sarzec in Tello and its neighbourhood carried the history of the city
back to at least 4000 B.C., and a collection of more than 30,000 tablets
has been found, which were arranged on shelves in the time of Gudea (_c._
2700 B.C.). In 1886-1887 a German expedition under Dr Koldewey explored the
cemetery of El Hibba (immediately to the south of Tello), and for the first
time made us acquainted with the burial customs of ancient Babylonia.
Another German expedition, on a large scale, was despatched by the
_Orientgesellschaft_ in 1899 with the object of exploring the ruins of
Babylon; the palace of Nebuchadrezzar and the great processional road were
laid bare, and Dr W. Andrae subsequently conducted excavations at Qal`at
Sherqat, the site of Assur. Even the Turkish government has not held aloof
from the work of exploration, and the Museum at Constantinople is filled
with the tablets discovered by Dr V. Scheil in 1897 on the site of Sippara.
J. de Morgan's exceptionally important work at Susa lies outside the limits
of Babylonia; not so, however, the American excavations (1903-1904) under
E. J. Banks at Bismya (Udab), and those of the university of Pennsylvania
at Niffer (see NIPPUR) first begun in 1889, where Mr J. H. Haynes has
systematically and patiently uncovered the remains of the great temple of
El-lil, removing layer after layer of débris and cutting sections in the
ruins down to the virgin soil. Midway in the mound is a platform of large
bricks stamped with the names of Sargon of Akkad and his son Naram-Sin
(3800 B.C.); as the débris above them is 34 ft. thick, the topmost stratum
being not later than the Parthian era (H. V. Hilprecht, _The Babylonian
Expedition_, i. 2, p. 23), it is calculated that the débris underneath the
pavement, 30 ft. thick, must represent a period of about 3000 years, more
especially as older constructions had to be levelled before the pavement
was laid. In the deepest part of the excavations, however, inscribed clay
tablets and fragments of stone vases are still found, though the cuneiform
characters upon them are of a very archaic type, and sometimes even retain
their primitive pictorial forms.

IV. _Chronology._[1] The later chronology of Assyria has long been fixed,
thanks to the lists of _limmi_, or archons, who gave their names in
succession to their years of office. Several copies of these lists from the
library of Nineveh are in existence, the earliest of which goes back to 911
B.C., while the latest comes down to the middle of the reign of
Assur-bani-pal. The beginning of a king's reign is noted in the lists, and
in some of them the chief events of the year are added to the name of its
archon. Assyrian chronology is, therefore, certain from 911 B.C. to 666,
and an eclipse of the sun which is stated to have been visible in the month
Sivan, 763 B.C., is one that has been calculated to have taken place on the
15th of June of that year. The system of reckoning time by _limmi_ was of
Assyrian origin, and recent discoveries have made it clear that it went
back to the first days of the monarchy. Even in the distant colony at Kara
Euyuk near Kaisariyeh (Caesarea) in Cappadocia cuneiform tablets show that
the Assyrian settlers used it in the 15th century B.C. In Babylonia a
different system was adopted. Here the years were dated by the chief events
that distinguished them, as was also the case in Egypt in the epoch of the
Old Empire. What the event should be was determined by the government and
notified to all its officials; one of these notices, sent to the Babylonian
officials in Canaan in the reign of Samsu-iluna, the son of Khammurabi, has
been found in the Lebanon. A careful register of the dates was kept,
divided into reigns, from which dynastic lists were afterwards compiled,
giving the duration of each king's reign as well as that of the several
dynasties. Two of these dynastic compilations have been discovered,
unfortunately in an imperfect state.[2] In addition to the chronological
tables, works of a more ambitious and literary character were also
attempted of the nature of chronicles. One of these is the so-called
"Synchronous History of Assyria and Babylonia," consisting of brief
notices, written by an Assyrian, of the occasions on which the kings of the
two countries had entered into relation, hostile or otherwise, with one
another; a second is the _Babylonian Chronicle_ discovered by Dr Th. G.
Pinches, which gave a synopsis of Babylonian history from a Babylonian
point of view, and was compiled in the reign of Darius. It is interesting
to note that its author says of the battle of Khalul[=e], which we know
from the Assyrian inscriptions to have taken place in 691 or 690 B.C., that
he does "not know the year" when it was fought: the records of Assyria had
been already lost, even in Babylonia. The early existence of an accurate
system of dating is not surprising; it was necessitated by the fact that
Babylonia was a great trading community, in which it was not only needful
that commercial and legal documents should be dated, but also that it
should be possible to refer easily to the dates of former business
transactions. The Babylonian and Assyrian kings had consequently no
difficulty in [v.03 p.0102] determining the age of their predecessors or of
past events. Nabonidus (Nabunaid), who was more of an antiquarian than a
politician, and spent his time in excavating the older temples of his
country and ascertaining the names of their builders, tells us that
Naram-Sin, the son of Sargon of Akkad, lived 3200 years before himself
(_i.e._ 3750 B.C.), and Sagarakti-suryas 800 years; and we learn from
Sennacherib that Shalmaneser I. reigned 600 years earlier, and that
Tiglath-pileser I. fought with Merodach-nadin-akhi (Marduk-nadin-akh[=e])
of Babylon 418 years before the campaign of 689 B.C.; while, according to
Tiglath-pileser I., the high-priest Samas-Hadad, son of Isme-Dagon, built
the temple of Anu and Hadad at Assur 701 years before his own time.
Shalmaneser I. in his turn states that the high-priest Samas-Hadad, the son
of Bel-kabi, governed Assur 580 years previously, and that 159 years before
this the high-priest Erisum was reigning there. The raid of the Elamite
king Kutur-Nakhkhunt[=e] is placed by Assur-bani-pal 1635 years before his
own conquest of Susa, and Khammurabi is said by Nabonidus to have preceded
Burna-buryas by 700 years.

[Sidenote: Early Sumerian period.]

V. _History_.--In the earliest period of which we have any knowledge
Babylonia was divided into several independent states, the limits of which
were defined by canals and boundary stones. Its culture may be traced back
to two main centres, Eridu in the south and Nippur in the north. But the
streams of civilization which flowed from them were in strong contrast.
El-lil, around whose sanctuary Nippur had grown up, was lord of the
ghost-land, and his gifts to mankind were the spells and incantations which
the spirits of good or evil were compelled to obey. The world which he
governed was a mountain; the creatures whom he had made lived underground.
Eridu, on the other hand, was the home of the culture-god Ea, the god of
light and beneficence, who employed his divine wisdom in healing the sick
and restoring the dead to life. Rising each morning from his palace in the
deep, he had given man the arts and sciences, the industries and manners of
civilization. To him was due the invention of writing, and the first
law-book was his creation. Eridu had once been a seaport, and it was
doubtless its foreign trade and intercourse with other lands which
influenced the development of its culture. Its cosmology was the result of
its geographical position: the earth, it was believed, had grown out of the
waters of the deep, like the ever-widening coast at the mouth of the
Euphrates. Long before history begins, however, the cultures of Eridu and
Nippur had coalesced. While Babylon seems to have been a colony of Eridu,
Ur, the immediate neighbour of Eridu, must have been colonized from Nippur,
since its moon-god was the son of El-lil of Nippur. But in the admixture of
the two cultures the influence of Eridu was predominant.

We may call the early civilization of Babylonia Sumerian. The race who
first developed it spoke an agglutinative language, and to them was due the
invention of the pictorial hieroglyphs which became the running-hand or
cuneiform characters of later days, as well as the foundation of the chief
cities of the country and the elements of its civilization. The great
engineering works by means of which the marshes were drained and the
overflow of the rivers regulated by canals went back to Sumerian times,
like a considerable part of later Babylonian religion and the beginnings of
Babylonian law. Indeed Sumerian continued to be the language of religion
and law long after the Semites had become the ruling race.

[Sidenote: Semitic Influence.]

_Arrival of the Semites_.--When the Semites first entered the Edin or plain
of Babylonia is uncertain, but it must have been at a remote period. The
cuneiform system of writing was still in process of growth when it was
borrowed and adapted by the new comers, and the Semitic Babylonian language
was profoundly influenced by the older language of the country, borrowing
its words and even its grammatical usages. Sumerian in its turn borrowed
from Semitic Babylonian, and traces of Semitic influence in some of the
earliest Sumerian texts indicate that the Semite was already on the
Babylonian border. His native home was probably Arabia; hence Eridu ("the
good city") and Ur ("the city") would have been built in Semitic territory,
and their population may have included Semitic elements from the first. It
was in the north, however, that the Semites first appear on the monuments.
Here in Akkad the first Semitic empire was founded, Semitic conquerors or
settlers spread from Sippara to Susa, Khana to the east of the Tigris was
occupied by "West Semitic" tribes, and "out of" Babylonia "went forth the
Assyrian." As in Assyria, so too in the states of Babylonia the _patesi_ or
high-priest of the god preceded the king. The state had grown up around a
sanctuary, the god of which was nominally its ruler, the human _patesi_
being his viceregent. In course of time many of the high-priests assumed
the functions and title of king; while retaining their priestly office they
claimed at the same time to be supreme in the state in all secular
concerns. The god remained nominally at its head; but even this position
was lost to him when Babylonia was unified under Semitic princes, and the
earthly king became an incarnate god. A recollection of his former power
survived, however, at Babylon, where Bel-Merodach adopted the king before
his right to rule was allowed.

[Sidenote: Ur-nin[=a]

_Early Princes_.--The earliest monuments that can be approximately
dynasty.] dated come from Lagash (Tello). Here we hear of a "king of
Kengi," as well as of a certain Me-silim, king of Kis, who had dealings
with Lugal-suggur, high-priest of Lagash, and the high-priest of a
neighbouring town, the name of which is provisionally transcribed Gis-ukh
(formerly written Gis-ban and confounded with the name of Opis). According
to Scheil, Gis-ukh is represented by Jokha, south of F[=a]ra and west of
the Shatt el-Hai, and since two of its rulers are called kings of T[=e] on
a seal-cylinder, this may have been the pronunciation of the name.[3] At a
later date the high-priests of Lagash made themselves kings, and a dynasty
was founded there by Ur-Nin[=a]. In the ruins of a building, attached by
him to the temple of Nin[=a], terra-cotta bas-reliefs of the king and his
sons have been found, as well as the heads of lions in onyx, which remind
us of Egyptian work and onyx plates. These were "booty" dedicated to the
goddess Bau. E-anna-du, the grandson of Ur-Nin[=a], made himself master of
the whole of southern Babylonia, including "the district of Sumer" together
with the cities of Erech, Ur and Larsa (?). He also annexed the kingdom of
Kis, which, however, recovered its independence after his death. Gis-ukh
was made tributary, a certain amount of grain being levied upon each person
in it, which had to be paid into the treasury of the goddess Nin[=a] and
the god Ingurisa. The so-called "Stele of the Vultures," now in the Louvre,
was erected as a monument of the victory. On this various incidents in the
war are represented. In one scene the king stands in his chariot with a
curved weapon in his right hand formed of three bars of metal bound
together by rings (similar, as M. L. Heuzey has pointed out, to one carried
by the chief of an Asiatic tribe in a tomb of the 12th dynasty at
Beni-Hasan in Egypt), while his kilted followers with helmets on their
heads and lances in their hands march behind him. In another a flock of
vultures is feeding on the bodies of the fallen enemy; in a third a tumulus
is being heaped up over those who had been slain on the side of Lagash.
Elsewhere we see the victorious prince beating down a vanquished enemy, and
superintending the execution of other prisoners who are being sacrificed to
the gods, while in one curious scene he is striking with his mace a sort of
wicker-work cage filled with naked men. In his hand he holds the crest of
Lagash and its god--a lion-headed eagle with outstretched wings, supported
by two lions which are set heraldically back to back. The sculptures belong
to a primitive period of art.

E-anna-du's campaigns extended beyond the confines of Babylonia. He overran
a part of Elam and took the city of Az on the Persian Gulf. Temples and
palaces were repaired or erected at Lagash and elsewhere, the town of
Nin[=a]--which probably gave [v.03 p.0103] its name to the later Nin[=a] or
Nineveh--was rebuilt, and canals and reservoirs were excavated. He was
succeeded by his brother En-anna-tum I., under whom Gis-ukh once more
became the dominant power. As En-anna-tum has the title only of
high-priest, it is probable that he acknowledged Ur-lumma of Gis-ukh as his
suzerain. His son and successor Entemena restored the prestige of Lagash.
Gis-ukh was subdued and a priest named Illi was made its governor. A tripod
of silver dedicated by Entemena to his god is now in the Louvre. A frieze
of lions devouring ibexes and deer, and incised with great artistic skill,
runs round the neck, while the eagle crest of Lagash adorns the globular
part. The vase is a proof of the high degree of excellence to which the
goldsmith's art had already attained. A vase of calcite, also dedicated by
Entemena, has been found at Nippur.

The eighth successor of Ur-Nin[=a] was Uru-duggina, who was overthrown and
his city captured by Lugal-zaggisi, the high-priest of Gis-ukh.
Lugal-zaggisi was the founder of the first empire in Asia of which we know.
He made Erech his capital and calls himself king of Kengi. In a long
inscription which he caused to be engraved on hundreds of stone vases
dedicated to El-lil of Nippur, he declares that his kingdom extended "from
the Lower Sea of the Tigris and Euphrates," or Persian Gulf, to "the Upper
Sea" or Mediterranean. It was at this time that Erech received the name of
"the City," which it continued to bear when written ideographically.

[Sidenote: Sargon.]

_Semitic Empire of Sargon of Akkad._--The next empire founded in western
Asia was Semitic. Semitic princes had already established themselves at
Kis, and a long inscription has been discovered at Susa by J. de Morgan,
belonging to one of them, Manistusu, who like Lugal-zaggisi was a
contemporary of Uru-duggina. Another Semitic ruler of Kis of the same
period was Alusarsid (or Urumus) who "subdued Elam and Barahs[=e]." But the
fame of these early establishers of Semitic supremacy was far eclipsed by
that of Sargon of Akkad and his son, Naram-Sin. The date of Sargon is
placed by Nabonidus at 3800 B.C. He was the son of Itti-Bel, and a legend
related how he had been born in concealment and sent adrift in an ark of
bulrushes on the waters of the Euphrates. Here he had been rescued and
brought up by "Akki the husbandman"; but the day arrived at length when his
true origin became known, the crown of Babylonia was set upon his head and
he entered upon a career of foreign conquest. Four times he invaded Syria
and Palestine, and spent three years in thoroughly subduing the countries
of "the west," and in uniting them with Babylonia "into a single empire."
Images of himself were erected on the shores of the Mediterranean in token
of his victories, and cities and palaces were built at home out of the
spoils of the conquered lands. Elam and the northern part of Mesopotamia
were also subjugated, and rebellions were put down both in Kazalla and in
Babylonia itself. Contract tablets have been found dated in the years of
the campaigns against Palestine and Sarlak, king of Gutium or Kurdistan,
and copper is mentioned as being brought from Magan or the Sinaitic
peninsula.

[Sidenote: Naram-Sin.]

Sargon's son and successor, Naram-Sin, followed up the successes of his
father by marching into Magan, whose king he took captive. He assumed the
imperial title of "king of the four zones," and, like his father, was
addressed as a god. He is even called "the god of Agad[=e]" (Akkad),
reminding us of the divine honours claimed by the Pharaohs of Egypt, whose
territory now adjoined that of Babylonia. A finely executed bas-relief,
representing Naram-Sin, and bearing a striking resemblance to early
Egyptian art in many of its features, has been found at Diarbekr.
Babylonian art, however, had already attained a high degree of excellence;
two seal cylinders of the time of Sargon are among the most beautiful
specimens of the gem-cutter's art ever discovered. The empire was bound
together by roads, along which there was a regular postal service; and clay
seals, which took the place of stamps, are now in the Louvre bearing the
names of Sargon and his son. A cadastral survey seems also to have been
instituted, and one of the documents relating to it states that a certain
Uru-Malik, whose name appears to indicate his Canaanitish origin, was
governor of the land of the Amorites, as Syria and Palestine were called by
the Babylonians. It is probable that the first collection of astronomical
observations and terrestrial omens was made for a library established by
Sargon.

[Sidenote: Ur dynasty.]

Bingani-sar-ali was the son of Naram-Sin, but we do not yet know whether he
followed his father on the throne. Another son was high-priest of the city
of Tutu, and in the name of his daughter, Lipus-Eaum, a priestess of Sin,
some scholars have seen that of the Hebrew deity Yahweh. The Babylonian god
Ea, however, is more likely to be meant. The fall of Sargon's empire seems
to have been as sudden as its rise. The seat of supreme power in Babylonia
was shifted southwards to Isin and Ur. It is generally assumed that two
dynasties reigned at Ur and claimed suzerainty over the other Babylonian
states, though there is as yet no clear proof that there was more than one.
It was probably Gungunu who succeeded in transferring the capital of
Babylonia from Isin to Ur, but his place in the dynasty (or dynasties) is
still uncertain. One of his successors was Ur-Gur, a great builder, who
built or restored the temples of the Moon-god at Ur, of the Sun-god at
Larsa, of Ishtar at Erech and of Bel at Nippur. His son and successor was
Dungi, whose reign lasted more than 51 years, and among whose vassals was
Gudea, the _patesi_ or high-priest of Lagash. Gudea was also a great
builder, and the materials for his buildings and statues were brought from
all parts of western Asia, cedar wood from the Amanus mountains, quarried
stones from Lebanon, copper from northern Arabia, gold and precious stones
from the desert between Palestine and Egypt, dolerite from Magan (the
Sinaitic peninsula) and timber from Dilmun in the Persian Gulf. Some of his
statues, now in the Louvre, are carved out of Sinaitic dolerite, and on the
lap of one of them (statue E) is the plan of his palace, with the scale of
measurement attached. Six of the statues bore special names, and offerings
were made to them as to the statues of the gods. Gudea claims to have
conquered Anshan in Elam, and was succeeded by his son Ur-Ningirsu. His
date may be provisionally fixed at 2700 B.C.

This dynasty of Ur was Semitic, not Sumerian, notwithstanding the name of
Dungi. Dungi was followed by Bur-Sin, Gimil-Sin, and Ibi-Sin. Their power
extended to the Mediterranean, and we possess a large number of
contemporaneous monuments in the shape of contracts and similar business
documents, as well as chronological tables, which belong to their reigns.

[Sidenote: Khammurabi.]

After the fall of the dynasty, Babylonia passed under foreign influence.
Sumuabi ("Shem is my father"), from southern Arabia (or perhaps Canaan),
made himself master of northern Babylonia, while Elamite invaders occupied
the south. After a reign of 14 years Sumuabi was succeeded by his son
Sumu-la-ilu, in the fifth year of whose reign the fortress of Babylon was
built, and the city became for the first time a capital. Rival kings,
Pungun-ila and Immerum, are mentioned in the contract tablets as reigning
at the same time as Sumu-la-ilu (or Samu-la-ilu); and under Sin-muballidh,
the great-grandson of Sumu-la-ilu, the Elamites laid the whole of the
country under tribute, and made Eri-Aku or Arioch, called Rim-Sin by his
Semitic subjects, king of Larsa. Eri-Aku was the son of Kudur-Mabug, who
was prince of Yamutbal, on the eastern border of Babylonia, and also
"governor of Syria." The Elamite supremacy was at last shaken off by the
son and successor of Sin-muballidh, Khammurabi, whose name is also written
Ammurapi and Khammuram, and who was the Amraphel of Gen. xiv. 1. The
Elamites, under their king Kudur-Lagamar or Chedor-laomer, seem to have
taken Babylon and destroyed the temple of Bel-Merodach; but Khammurabi
retrieved his fortunes, and in the thirtieth year of his reign (in 2340
B.C.) he overthrew the Elamite forces in a decisive battle and drove them
out of Babylonia. The next two years were occupied in adding Larsa and
Yamutbal to his dominion, and in forming Babylonia into a single monarchy,
the head of which was Babylon. A great literary revival followed the
recovery of Babylonian independence, and the rule of Babylon was obeyed as
far as the shores of the Mediterranean. Vast numbers of contract tablets,
dated in the reigns of Khammurabi and other kings of the dynasty, have
[v.03 p.0104] been discovered, as well as autograph letters of the kings
themselves, more especially of Khammurabi. Among the latter is one ordering
the despatch of 240 soldiers from Assyria and Situllum, a proof that
Assyria was at the time a Babylonian dependency. Constant intercourse was
kept up between Babylonia and the west, Babylonian officials and troops
passing to Syria and Canaan, while "Amorite" colonists were established in
Babylonia for the purposes of trade. One of these Amorites, Abi-ramu or
Abram by name, is the father of a witness to a deed dated in the reign of
Khammurabi's grandfather. Ammi-ditana, the great-grandson of Khammurabi,
still entitles himself "king of the land of the Amorites," and both his
father and son bear the Canaanitish (and south Arabian) names of Abesukh or
Abishua and Ammi-zadok.

One of the most important works of this "First Dynasty of Babylon," as it
was called by the native historians, was the compilation of a code of laws
(see BABYLONIAN LAW). This was made by order of Khammurabi after the
expulsion of the Elamites and the settlement of his kingdom. A copy of the
Code has been found at Susa by J. de Morgan and is now in the Louvre, The
last king of the dynasty was Samsu-ditana the son of Ammi-zadok. He was
followed by a dynasty of 11 Sumerian kings, who are said to have reigned
for 368 years, a number which must be much exaggerated. As yet the name of
only one of them has been found in a contemporaneous document. They were
overthrown and Babylonia was conquered by Kassites or Kossaeans from the
mountains of Elam, with whom Samsu-iluna had already come into conflict in
his 9th year. The Kassite dynasty was founded by Kandis, Gandis or Gaddas
(about 1780 B.C.), and lasted for 576¾ years. Under this foreign dominion,
which offers a striking analogy to the contemporary rule of the Hyksos in
Egypt, Babylonia lost its empire over western Asia, Syria and Palestine
became independent, and the high-priests of Assur made themselves kings of
Assyria. The divine attributes with which the Semitic kings of Babylonia
had been invested disappeared at the same time; the title of "god" is never
given to a Kassite sovereign. Babylon, however, remained the capital of the
kingdom and the holy city of western Asia, where the priests were
all-powerful, and the right to the inheritance of the old Babylonian empire
could alone be conferred.

_Rise of Assyria_.--Under Khammurabi a Samsi-Hadad (or Samsi-Raman) seems
to have been vassal-prince at Assur, and the names of several of the
high-priests of Assur who succeeded him have been made known to us by the
recent German excavations. The foundation of the monarchy was ascribed to
Zulilu, who is described as living after Bel-kapkapi or Belkabi (1900
B.C.), the ancestor of Shalmaneser I. Assyria grew in power at the expense
of Babylonia, and a time came when the Kassite king of Babylonia was glad
to marry the daughter of Assur-yuballidh of Assyria, whose letters to
Amenophis (Amon-hotep) IV. of Egypt have been found at Tell el-Amarna. The
marriage, however, led to disastrous results, as the Kassite faction at
court murdered the king and placed a pretender on the throne.
Assur-yuballidh promptly marched into Babylonia and avenged his son-in-law,
making Burna-buryas of the royal line king in his stead. Burna-buryas, who
reigned 22 years, carried on a correspondence with Amenophis IV. of Egypt.
[Sidenote: Shalmaneser I.] After his death, the Assyrians, who were still
nominally the vassals of Babylonia, threw off all disguise, and Shalmaneser
I. (1300 B.C.), the great-great-grandson of Assur-yuballidh, openly claimed
the supremacy in western Asia. Shalmaneser was the founder of Calah, and
his annals, which have recently been discovered at Assur, show how widely
extended the Assyrian empire already was. Campaign after campaign was
carried on against the Hittites and the wild tribes of the north-west, and
Assyrian colonists were settled in Cappadocia. His son Tukulti-In-aristi
conquered Babylon, putting its king Bitilyasu to death, and thereby made
Assyria the mistress of the oriental world. Assyria had taken the place of
Babylonia.

For 7 years Tukulti-In-aristi ruled at Babylon with the old imperial title
of "king of Sumer and Akkad." Then the Babylonians revolted. The Assyrian
king was murdered by his son, Assur-nazir-pal I., and Hadad-nadin-akhi made
king of Babylonia. But it was not until several years later, in the reign
of the Assyrian king Tukulti-Assur, that a reconciliation was effected
between the two rival kingdoms. The next Assyrian monarch, Bel-kudur-uzur,
was the last of the old royal line. He seems to have been slain fighting
against the Babylonians, who were still under the rule of Hadad-nadin-akhi,
and a new dynasty was established at Assur by In-aristi-pileser, who
claimed to be a descendant of the ancient prince Erba-Raman. [Sidenote:
Tiglath-pileser I.] His fourth successor was Tiglath-pileser I., one of the
great conquerors of Assyria, who carried his arms towards Armenia on the
north and Cappadocia on the west; he hunted wild bulls in the Lebanon and
was presented with a crocodile by the Egyptian king. In 1107 B.C., however,
he sustained a temporary defeat at the hands of Merodach-nadin-akhi
(Marduk-nadin-akh[=e]) of Babylonia, where the Kassite dynasty had finally
succumbed to Elamite attacks and a new line of kings was on the throne.

[Sidenote: Assur-nazir-pal III.]

Of the immediate successors of Tiglath-pileser I. we know little, and it is
with Assur-nazir-pal III. (883-858 B.C.) that our knowledge of Assyrian
history begins once more to be fairly full. The empire of Assyria was again
extended in all directions, and the palaces, temples and other buildings
raised by him bear witness to a considerable development of wealth and art.
Calah became the favourite residence of a monarch who was distinguished
even among Assyrian conquerors for his revolting cruelties. [Sidenote:
Shalmaneser II.] His son Shalmaneser II. had a long reign of 35 years,
during which the Assyrian capital was converted into a sort of armed camp.
Each year the Assyrian armies marched out of it to plunder and destroy.
Babylon was occupied and the country reduced to vassalage. In the west the
confederacy of Syrian princes headed by Benhadad of Damascus and including
Ahab of Israel (see JEWS, § 10) was shattered in 853 B.C., and twelve years
later the forces of Hazael were annihilated and the ambassadors of Jehu of
Samaria brought tribute to "the great king." The last few years of his
life, however, were disturbed by the rebellion of his eldest son, which
well-nigh proved fatal. Assur, Arbela and other places joined the
pretender, and the revolt was with difficulty put down by Samsi-Raman (or
Samsi-Hadad), Shalmaneser's second son, who soon afterwards succeeded him
(824 B.C.). In 804 B.C. Damascus was captured by his successor Hadad-nirari
IV., to whom tribute was paid by Samaria.

[Sidenote: Nabu-nazir.]

With Nabu-nazir, the Nabonassar of classical writers, the so-called Canon
of Ptolemy begins. When he ascended the throne of Babylon in 747 B.C.
Assyria was in the throes of a revolution. Civil war and pestilence were
devastating the country, and its northern provinces had been wrested from
it by Ararat. In 746 B.C. Calah joined the rebels, and on the 13th of Iyyar
in the following year, Pulu or Pul, who took the name of Tiglath-pileser
III., seized the crown and inaugurated a new and vigorous policy.

[Sidenote: Tiglath-pileser III.]

_Second Assyrian Empire._--Under Tiglath-pileser III. arose the second
Assyrian empire, which differed from the first in its greater
consolidation. For the first time in history the idea of centralization was
introduced into politics; the conquered provinces were organized under an
elaborate bureaucracy at the head of which was the king, each district
paying a fixed tribute and providing a military contingent. The Assyrian
forces became a standing army, which, by successive improvements and
careful discipline, was moulded into an irresistible fighting machine, and
Assyrian policy was directed towards the definite object of reducing the
whole civilized world into a single empire and thereby throwing its trade
and wealth into Assyrian hands. With this object, after terrorizing Armenia
and the Medes and breaking the power of the Hittites, Tiglath-pileser III.
secured the high-roads of commerce to the Mediterranean together with the
Phoenician seaports and then made himself master of Babylonia. In 729 B.C.
the summit of his ambition was attained, and he was invested with the
sovereignty of Asia in the holy city of Babylon. Two years later, in Tebet
[v.03 p.0105] 727 B.C., he died, but his successor Ulul[=a], who took the
name of Shalmaneser IV., continued the policy he had begun. Shalmaneser
died suddenly in Tebet 722 B.C., while pressing the siege of Samaria, and
the seizure of the throne by another general, Sargon, on the 12th of the
month, gave the Babylonians an opportunity to revolt. [Sidenote:
Merodach-baladan.] In Nisan the Kald[=a] prince, Merodach (Marduk)-baladan,
entered Babylon and was there crowned legitimate king. For twelve years he
successfully resisted the Assyrians; but the failure of his allies in the
west to act in concert with him, and the overthrow of the Elamites,
eventually compelled him to fly to his ancestral domains in the marshes of
southern Babylonia. Sargon, who meanwhile had crushed the confederacy of
the northern nations, had taken (717 B.C.) the Hittite stronghold of
Carchemish and had annexed the future kingdom of Ecbatana, was now accepted
as king by the Babylonian priests and his claim to be the successor of
Sargon of Akkad acknowledged up to the time of his murder in 705 B.C.
[Sidenote: Sennacherib.] His son Sennacherib, who succeeded him on the 12th
of Ab, did not possess the military or administrative abilities of his
father, and the success of his reign was not commensurate with the vanity
of the ruler. He was never crowned at Babylon, which was in a perpetual
state of revolt until, in 691 B.C., he shocked the religious and political
conscience of Asia by razing the holy city of Babylon to the ground. His
campaign against Hezekiah of Judah was as much a failure as his policy in
Babylonia, and in his murder by his sons on the 20th of Tebet 681 B.C. both
Babylonians and Jews saw the judgment of heaven.

[Sidenote: Esar-haddon.]

Esar-haddon, who succeeded him, was of different calibre from his father.
He was commanding the army in a campaign against Ararat at the time of the
murder; forty-two days later the murderers fled from Nineveh and took
refuge at the court of Ararat. But the Armenian army was utterly defeated
near Malatia on the 12th of Iyyar, and at the end of the day Esar-haddon
was saluted by his soldiers as king. He thereupon returned to Nineveh and
on the 8th of Sivan formally ascended the throne.

One of his first acts was to restore Babylon, to send back the image of
Bel-Merodach (Bel-Marduk) to its old home, and to re-people the city with
such of the priests and the former population as had survived massacre.
Then he was solemnly declared king in the temple of Bel-Merodach, which had
again risen from its ruins, and Babylon became the second capital of the
empire. Esar-haddon's policy was successful and Babylonia remained
contentedly quiet throughout his reign. In February (674 B.C.) the
Assyrians entered upon their invasion of Egypt (see also EGYPT: _History_),
and in Nisan (or March) 670 B.C. an expedition on an unusually large scale
set out from Nineveh. The Egyptian frontier was crossed on the 3rd of
Tammuz (June), and Tirhaka, at the head of the Egyptian forces, was driven
to Memphis after fifteen days of continuous fighting, during which the
Egyptians were thrice defeated with heavy loss and Tirhaka himself was
wounded. On the 22nd of the month Memphis was entered by the victorious
army and Tirhaka fled to the south. A stele, commemorating the victory and
representing Tirhaka with the features of a negro, was set up at Sinjirli
(north of the Gulf of Antioch) and is now in the Berlin Museum. Two years
later (668 B.C.) Egypt revolted, and while on the march to reduce it,
Esar-haddon fell ill and died (on the 10th of Marchesvan or October).
[Sidenote: Assur-bani-pal.] Assur-bani-pal succeeded him as king of Assyria
and its empire, while his brother, Samas-sum-yukin, was made viceroy of
Babylonia. The arrangement was evidently intended to flatter the
Babylonians by giving them once more the semblance of independence. But it
failed to work. Samas-sum-yukin became more Babylonian than his subjects;
the viceroy claimed to be the successor of the monarchs whose empire had
once stretched to the Mediterranean; even the Sumerian language was revived
as the official tongue, and a revolt broke out which shook the Assyrian
empire to its foundations. After several years of struggle, during which
Egypt recovered its independence, Babylon was starved into surrender, and
the rebel viceroy and his supporters were put to death.

Egypt had already recovered its independence (660 B.C.) with the help of
mercenaries sent by Gyges of Lydia, who had vainly solicited aid from
Assyria against his Cimmerian enemies. Next followed the contest with Elam,
in spite of the efforts of Assur-bani-pal to ward it off. Assyria, however,
was aided by civil war in Elam itself; the country was wasted with fire and
sword, and its capital Susa or Shushan levelled with the ground. But the
long struggle left Assyria maimed and exhausted. It had been drained of
both wealth and fighting population; the devastated provinces of Elam and
Babylonia could yield nothing with which to supply the needs of the
imperial exchequer, and it was difficult to find sufficient troops even to
garrison the conquered populations. Assyria, therefore, was ill prepared to
face the hordes of Scythians--or Manda, as they were called by the
Babylonians--who now began to harass the frontiers. A Scythian power had
grown up in the old kingdom of Ellip, to the east of Assyria, where
Ecbatana was built by a "Manda" prince; Asia Minor was infested by the
Scythian tribe of Cimmerians, and the death of the Scythian leader
Dugdamm[=e] (the Lygdamis of Strabo i. 3. 16) was regarded by
Assur-bani-pal as a special mark of divine favour.

[Sidenote: Scythian influence.]

When Assur-bani-pal died, his empire was fast breaking up. Under his
successor, Assur-etil-ilani, the Scythians penetrated into Assyria and made
their way as far as the borders of Egypt. Calah was burned, though the
strong walls of Nineveh protected the relics of the Assyrian army which had
taken refuge behind them; and when the raiders had passed on to other
fields of booty, a new palace was erected among the ruins of the
neighbouring city. But its architectural poverty and small size show that
the resources of Assyria were at a low ebb. A contract has been found at
Sippara, dated in the fourth year of Assur-etil-ilani, though it is
possible that his rule in Babylonia was disputed by his Rab-shakeh
(vizier), Assur-sum-lisir, whose accession year as king of Assyria occurs
on a contract from Nippur (Niffer). The last king of Assyria was probably
the brother of Assur-etil-ilani, Sin-sar-iskun (Sin-sarra-uzur), who seems
to have been the Sarakos (Saracus) of Berossus. He was still reigning in
Babylonia in his seventh year, as a contract dated in that year has been
discovered at Erech, and an inscription of his, in which he speaks of
restoring the ruined temples and their priests, couples Merodach of Babylon
with Assur of Nineveh. Babylonia, however, was again restless. After the
over throw of Samas-sum-yukin, Kandalanu, the Chineladanos of Ptolemy's
canon, had been appointed viceroy. [Sidenote: Nabopolassar.] His successor
was Nabopolassar, between whom and the last king of Assyria war broke out.
The Scythian king of Ecbatana, the Cyaxares of the Greeks, came to the help
of the Babylonians. Nineveh was captured and destroyed by the Scythian
army, along with those cities of northern Babylonia which had sided with
Babylonia, and the Assyrian empire was at an end.

[Sidenote: Nabonidus.]

The seat of empire was now transferred to Babylonia. Nabopolassar was
followed by his son Nebuchadrezzar II., whose reign of 43 years made
Babylon once more the mistress of the civilized world. Only a small
fragment of his annals has been discovered relating to his invasion of
Egypt in 567 B.C., and referring to "Phut of the Ionians." Of the reign of
the last Babylonian king, Nabonidus, however, and the conquest of Babylonia
by Cyrus, we now have a fair amount of information.[4] This is chiefly
derived from a chronological tablet containing the annals of Nabonidus,
which is supplemented by an inscription of Nabonidus, in which he recounts
his restoration of the temple of the Moon-god at Harran, as well as by a
proclamation of Cyrus issued shortly after his formal recognition as king
of Babylonia. It was in the sixth year of Nabonidus (549 B.C.)--or perhaps
in 553--that Cyrus, "king of Anshan" in Elam, revolted against his suzerain
Astyages, king of "the Manda" or Scythians, at Ecbatana. The army of
Astyages betrayed him to his enemy, and Cyrus (_q.v._) established himself
at Ecbatana, thus putting an end to the empire of the Scythians, [v.03
p.0106] which the Greek writers called that of the Medes, through a
confusion of Mad[=a] or "Medes" with Manda. [Sidenote: Invasion by Cyrus.]
Three years later we find that Cyrus has become king of Persia and is
engaged in a campaign in the north of Mesopotamia. Meanwhile Nabonidus has
established a camp at Sippara, near the northern frontier of his kingdom,
his son--probably the Belshazzar of other inscriptions--being in command of
the army. In 538 B.C. Cyrus invaded Babylonia. A battle was fought at Opis
in the month of June, in which the Babylonians were defeated, and
immediately afterwards Sippara surrendered to the invader. Nabonidus fled
to Babylon, whither he was pursued by Gobryas, the governor of Kurdistan,
and on the 16th of Tammuz, two days after the capture of Sippara, "the
soldiers of Cyrus entered Babylon without fighting." Nabonidus was dragged
out of his hiding-place, and Kurdish guards were placed at the gates of the
great temple of Bel, where the services continued without intermission.
Cyrus did not arrive till the 3rd of Marchesvan (October), Gobryas having
acted for him in his absence. Gobryas was now made governor of the province
of Babylon, and a few days afterwards the son of Nabonidus, according to
the most probable reading, died. A public mourning followed, which lasted
six days, and Cambyses accompanied the corpse to the tomb. Cyrus now
claimed to be the legitimate successor of the ancient Babylonian kings and
the avenger of Bel-Merodach, who was wrathful at the impiety of Nabonidus
in removing the images of the local gods from their ancestral shrines to
his capital Babylon. Nabonidus, in fact, had excited a strong feeling
against himself by attempting to centralize the religion of Babylonia in
the temple of Merodach (Marduk) at Babylon, and while he had thus alienated
the local priesthoods the military party despised him on account of his
antiquarian tastes. He seems to have left the defence of his kingdom to
others, occupying himself with the more congenial work of excavating the
foundation records of the temples and determining the dates of their
builders. The invasion of Babylonia by Cyrus was doubtless facilitated by
the existence of a disaffected party in the state, as well as by the
presence of foreign exiles like the Jews, who had been planted in the midst
of the country. One of the first acts of Cyrus accordingly was to allow
these exiles to return to their own homes, carrying with them the images of
their gods and their sacred vessels. The permission to do so was embodied
in a proclamation, in which the conqueror endeavoured to justify his claim
to the Babylonian throne. The feeling was still strong that none had a
right to rule over western Asia until he had been consecrated to the office
by Bel and his priests; and from henceforth, accordingly, Cyrus assumed the
imperial title of "king of Babylon." A year before his death, in 529 B.C.,
he associated his son Cambyses (_q.v._) in the government, making him king
of Babylon, while he reserved for himself the fuller title of "king of the
(other) provinces" of the empire. It was only when Darius Hystaspis, the
representative of the Aryan race and the Zoroastrian religion, had
re-conquered the empire of Cyrus, that the old tradition was broken and the
claim of Babylon to confer legitimacy on the rulers of western Asia ceased
to be acknowledged (see DARIUS). Darius, in fact, entered Babylon as a
conqueror; after the murder of the Magian it had recovered its independence
under Nidinta-Bel, who took the name of Nebuchadrezzar III., and reigned
from October 521 B.C. to August 520 B.C., when the Persians took it by
storm. A few years later, probably 514 B.C., Babylon again revolted under
the Armenian Arakha; on this occasion, after its capture by the Persians,
the walls were partly destroyed. E-Saggila, the great temple of Bel,
however, still continued to be kept in repair and to be a centre of
Babylonian patriotism, until at last the foundation of Seleucia diverted
the population to the new capital of Babylonia and the ruins of the old
city became a quarry for the builders of the new seat of government.[5]

VI. _Assyria and Babylonia contrasted._--The sister-states of Babylonia and
Assyria differed essentially in character. Babylonia was a land of
merchants and agriculturists; Assyria was an organized camp. The Assyrian
dynasties were founded [v.03 p.0107] by successful generals; in Babylonia
it was the priests whom a revolution raised to the throne. The Babylonian
king remained a priest to the last, under the control of a powerful
hierarchy; the Assyrian king was the autocratic general of an army, at
whose side stood in early days a feudal nobility, and from the reign of
Tiglath-pileser III. onwards an elaborate bureaucracy. His palace was more
sumptuous than the temples of the gods, from which it was quite separate.
The people were soldiers and little else; even the sailor belonged to
Babylonia. Hence the sudden collapse of Assyria when drained of its
fighting population in the age of Assur-bani-pal.

VII. _Assyro-Babylonian Culture_.--Assyrian culture came from Babylonia,
but even here there was a difference between the two countries. There was
little in Assyrian literature that was original, and education, which was
general in Babylonia, was in the northern kingdom confined for the most
part to a single class. In Babylonia it was of very old standing. There
were libraries in most of the towns and temples; an old Sumerian proverb
averred that "he who would excel in the school of the scribes must rise
with the dawn." Women as well as men learned to read and write, and in
Semitic times this involved a knowledge of the extinct Sumerian as well as
of a most complicated and extensive syllabary. A considerable amount of
Semitic Babylonian literature was translated from Sumerian originals, and
the language of religion and law long continued to be the old agglutinative
language of Chaldaea. Vocabularies, grammars and interlinear translations
were compiled for the use of students as well as commentaries on the older
texts and explanations of obscure words and phrases. The characters of the
syllabary were all arranged and named, and elaborate lists of them were
drawn up. The literature was for the most part inscribed with a metal
stylus on tablets of clay, called _laterculae coctiles_ by Pliny; the
papyrus which seems to have been also employed has perished. Under the
second Assyrian empire, when Nineveh had become a great centre of trade,
Aramaic--the language of commerce and diplomacy--was added to the number of
subjects which the educated class was required to learn. Under the
Seleucids Greek was introduced into Babylon, and fragments of tablets have
been found with Sumerian and Assyrian (_i.e._ Semitic Babylonian) words
transcribed in Greek letters.

_Babylonian Literature and Science_.--There were many literary works the
titles of which have come down to us. One of the most famous of these was
the _Epic of Gilgamesh_, in twelve books, composed by a certain
Sin-liqi-unninni, and arranged upon an astronomical principle. Each
division contains the story of a single adventure in the career of
Gilgamesh. The whole story is a composite product, and it is possible that
some of the stories are artificially attached to the central figure. (See
GILGAMESH, EPIC OF.)

Another epic was that of the Creation, the object of which was to glorify
Bel-Merodach by describing his contest with Tiamat, the dragon of chaos. In
the first book an account is given of the creation of the world out of the
primeval deep and the birth of the gods of light. Then comes the story of
the struggle between the gods of light and the powers of darkness, and the
final victory of Merodach, who clove Tiamat asunder, forming the heaven out
of one half of her body and the earth out of the other. Merodach next
arranged the stars in order, along with the sun and moon, and gave them
laws which they were never to transgress. After this the plants and animals
were created, and finally man. Merodach here takes the place of Ea, who
appears as the creator in the older legends, and is said to have fashioned
man out of the clay.

The legend of Adapa, the first man, a portion of which was found in the
record-office of the Egyptian king Amenophis IV. (Akhenaton) at
Tell-el-Amarna, explains the origin of death. Adapa while fishing had
broken the wings of the south wind, and was accordingly summoned before the
tribunal of Anu in heaven. Ea counselled him not to eat or drink there. He
followed the advice, and thus refused the food which would have made him
and his descendants immortal.

Among the other legends of Babylonia may be mentioned those of Namtar, the
plague-demon, of Urra, the pestilence, of Etanna and of Zu. Hades, the
abode of Nin-erisgal or Allat, had been entered by Nergal, who, angered by
a message sent to her by the gods of the upper world, ordered Namtar to
strike off her head. She, however, declared that she would submit to any
conditions imposed on her and would give Nergal the sovereignty of the
earth. Nergal accordingly relented, and Allatu became the queen of the
infernal world. Etanna conspired with the eagle to fly to the highest
heaven. The first gate, that of Anu, was successfully reached; but in
ascending still farther to the gate of Ishtar the strength of the eagle
gave way, and Etanna was dashed to the ground. As for the storm-god Zu, we
are told that he stole the tablets of destiny, and therewith the
prerogatives of Bel. God after god was ordered to pursue him and recover
them, but it would seem that it was only by a stratagem that they were
finally regained.

Besides the purely literary works there were others of the most varied
nature, including collections of letters, partly official, partly private.
Among them the most interesting are the letters of Khammurabi, which have
been edited by L. W. King. Astronomy and astrology, moreover, occupy a
conspicuous place. Astronomy was of old standing in Babylonia, and the
standard work on the subject, written from an astrological point of view,
which was translated into Greek by Berossus, was believed to go back to the
age of Sargon of Akkad. The zodiac was a Babylonian invention of great
antiquity; and eclipses of the sun as well as of the moon could be
foretold. Observatories were attached to the temples, and reports were
regularly sent by the astronomers to the king. The stars had been numbered
and named at an early date, and we possess tables of lunar longitudes and
observations of the phases of Venus. In Seleucid and Parthian times the
astronomical reports were of a thoroughly scientific character; how far the
advanced knowledge and method they display may reach back we do not yet
know. Great attention was naturally paid to the calendar, and we find a
week of seven and another of five days in use. The development of astronomy
implies considerable progress in mathematics; it is not surprising,
therefore, that the Babylonians should have invented an extremely simple
method of ciphering or have discovered the convenience of the duodecimal
system. The _ner_ of 600 and the _sar_ of 3600 were formed from the _soss_
or unit of 60, which corresponded with a degree of the equator. Tablets
[v.03 p.0108] of squares and cubes, calculated from 1 to 60, have been
found at Senkera, and a people who were acquainted with the sun-dial, the
clepsydra, the lever and the pulley, must have had no mean knowledge of
mechanics. A crystal lens, turned on the lathe, was discovered by Layard at
Nimrud along with glass vases bearing the name of Sargon; this will explain
the excessive minuteness of some of the writing on the Assyrian tablets,
and a lens may also have been used in the observation of the heavens.

_Art and Architecture_.--The culture of Assyria, and still more of
Babylonia, was essentially literary; we miss in it the artistic spirit of
Egypt or Greece. In Babylonia the abundance of clay and want of stone led
to the employment of brick; the Babylonian temples are massive but
shapeless structures of crude brick, supported by buttresses, the rain
being carried off by drains, one of which at Ur was of lead. The use of
brick led to the early development of the pilaster and column, as well as
of frescoes and enamelled tiles. The walls were brilliantly coloured, and
sometimes plated with bronze or gold as well as with tiles. Painted
terra-cotta cones were also embedded in the plaster. Assyria in this, as in
other matters, the servile pupil of Babylonia, built its palaces and
temples of brick, though stone was the natural building material of the
country, even preserving the brick platform, so necessary in the marshy
soil of Babylonia, but little needed in the north. As time went on,
however, the later Assyrian architect began to shake himself free from
Babylonian influences and to employ stone as well as brick. The walls of
the Assyrian palaces were lined with sculptured and coloured slabs of
stone, instead of being painted as in Chaldaea. We can. trace three periods
in the art of these bas-reliefs; it is vigorous but simple under
Assur-nazir-pal III., careful and realistic under Sargon, refined but
wanting in boldness under Assur-bani-pal. In Babylonia, in place of the
bas-relief we have the figure in the round, the earliest examples being the
statues from Tello which are realistic but somewhat clumsy. The want of
stone in Babylonia made every pebble precious and led to a high perfection
in the art of gem-cutting. Nothing can be better than two seal-cylinders
that have come down to us from the age of Sargon of Akkad. No remarkable
specimens of the metallurgic art of an early period have been found, apart
perhaps from the silver vase of Entemena, but at a later epoch great
excellence was attained in the manufacture of such jewellery as ear-rings
and bracelets of gold. Copper, too, was worked with skill; indeed, it is
possible that Babylonia was the original home of copper-working, which
spread westward with the civilization to which it belonged. At any rate the
people were famous from an early date for their embroideries and rugs. The
ceramic history of Babylonia and Assyria has unfortunately not yet been
traced; at Susa alone has the care demanded by the modern methods of
archaeology been as yet expended on examining and separating the pottery
found in the excavations, and Susa is not Babylonia. We do not even know
the date of the spirited terra-cotta reliefs discovered by Loftus and
Rawlinson. The forms of Assyrian pottery, however, are graceful; the
porcelain, like the glass discovered in the palaces of Nineveh, was derived
from Egyptian originals. Transparent glass seems to have been first
introduced in the reign of Sargon. Stone as well as clay and glass were
employed in the manufacture of vases, and vases of hard stone have been
disinterred at Tello similar to those of the early dynastic period of
Egypt.

_Social Life_.--Castes were unknown in both Babylonia and Assyria, but the
priesthood of Babylonia found its counterpart in the military aristocracy
of Assyria. The priesthood was divided into a great number of classes,
among which that of the doctors may be reckoned. The army was raised, at
all events in part, by conscription; a standing army seems to have been
first organized in Assyria. Successive improvements were introduced into it
by the kings of the second Assyrian empire; chariots were superseded by
cavalry; Tiglath-pileser III. gave the riders saddles and high boots, and
Sennacherib created a corps of slingers. Tents, baggage-carts and
battering-rams were carried on the march, and the _tartan_ or
commander-in-chief ranked next to the king. In both countries there was a
large body of slaves; above them came the agriculturists and commercial
classes, who were, however, comparatively little numerous in Assyria. The
scribes, on the other hand, formed a more important class in Assyria than
in Babylonia. Both countries had their artisans, money-lenders, poets and
musicians.

The houses of the people contained but little furniture; chairs, tables and
couches, however, were used, and Assur-bani-pal is represented as reclining
on his couch at a meal while his wife sits on a chair beside him. After
death the body was usually partially cremated along with the objects that
had been buried with it. The cemetery adjoined the city of the living and
was laid out in streets through which ran rivulets of "pure" water. Many of
the tombs, which were built of crude brick, were provided with gardens, and
there were shelves or altars on which were placed the offerings to the
dead. As the older tombs decayed a fresh city of tombs arose on their
ruins. It is remarkable that thus far no cemetery older than the Seleucid
or Parthian period has been found in Assyria.

AUTHORITIES.--See A. H. Layard, _Nineveh and Babylon_ (1853); E. de Sarzec
and L. Heuzey, _Découvertes en Chaldée_ (1884 foll.); H. V. Hilprecht, _The
Babylonian Expedition of the University of Pennsylvania_ (1893 foll.);
J. P. Peters, _Nippur_ (1897); E. Schrader, _Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek_
(1889-1900); _Records of the Past_ (new series, 1888-1892); Th. G. Pinches,
"The Babylonian Chronicle," in _Journ. R. A. S._ (1887); H. Winckler,
_Altorientalische Forschungen_ (1893 foll.), and _The Tell-el-Amarna,
Letters_ (1896); G. Maspero, _Dawn of Civilization_ (1896), _Struggle of
the Nations_ (1897), and _Passing of the Empires_ (1900); L. W. King,
_Letters of Khammurabi_ (1898-1900); H. Radau, _Early Babylonian History_
(1900); R. W. Rogers, _History of Babylonia and Assyria_ (1900); F. Hommel,
_Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des alten Orients_ (1904);
_Mitteilungen der deutschen Orientgesellschaft_ (1899).

(A. H. S.)

VIII. _Chronological Systems_.--The extreme divergence in the chronological
schemes employed by different writers on the history of Babylonia and
Assyria has frequently caused no small perplexity to readers who have no
special knowledge of the subject. In this section an attempt is made to
indicate briefly the causes which have led to so great a diversity of
opinion, and to describe in outline the principles underlying the chief
schemes of chronology that have been suggested; a short account will then
be given of the latest discoveries in this branch of research, and of the
manner in which they affect the problems at issue. It will be convenient to
begin with the later historical periods, and then to push our inquiry back
into the earlier periods of Babylonian and Sumerian history.

Up to certain points no difference of opinion exists upon the dates to be
assigned to the later kings who ruled in Babylon and in Assyria. The
Ptolemaic Canon (see sect. II.) gives a list of the Babylonian, Assyrian
and Persian kings who ruled in Babylon, together with the number of years
each of them reigned, from the accession of Nabonassar in 747 B.C. to the
conquest of Babylon by Alexander the Great in 331 B.C. The accuracy of this
list is confirmed by the larger List of Kings and by the principal
Babylonian Chronicle; the latter, like the Canon, begins with the reign of
Nabonassar, who, it has been suggested, may have revised the calendar and
have inaugurated a new epoch for the later chronology. The Ptolemaic Canon
is further controlled and its accuracy confirmed by the Assyrian Eponym
Lists, or lists of _limmi_ (see sect. II.), by means of which Assyrian
chronology is fixed from 911 B.C. to 666 B.C., the solar eclipse of June
15th, 763 B.C., which is recorded in the eponymy of Pur-Sagale, placing the
dead reckoning for these later periods upon an absolutely certain basis.

Thus all historians are agreed with regard to the Babylonian chronology
back to the year 747 B.C., and with regard to that of Assyria back to the
year 911 B.C. It is in respect of the periods anterior to these two dates
that different writers have propounded differing systems of chronology,
and, as might be imagined, the earlier the period we examine the greater
becomes the discrepancy between the systems proposed. This variety of
opinion is due to the fact that the data available for settling the
chronology often conflict with one another, or are capable of more than one
interpretation.

Since its publication in 1884 the Babylonian List of Kings has furnished
the framework for every chronological system that has [v.03 p.0109] been
proposed. In its original form this document gave a list, arranged in
dynasties, of the Babylonian kings, from the First Dynasty of Babylon down
to the Neo-Babylonian period. If the text were complete we should probably
be in possession of the system of Babylonian chronology current in the
Neo-Babylonian period from which our principal classical authorities (see
sect. II.) derived their information. The principal points of uncertainty,
due to gaps in the text, concern the length of Dynasties IV. and VIII.; for
the reading of the figure giving the length of the former is disputed, and
the summary at the close of the latter omits to state its length. This
omission is much to be regretted, since Nabonassar was the last king but
two of this dynasty, and, had we known its duration, we could have combined
the information on the earlier periods furnished by the Kings' List with
the evidence of the Ptolemaic Canon. In addition to the Kings' List, other
important chronological data consist of references in the classical
authorities to the chronological system of Berossus (_q.v._); chronological
references to earlier kings occurring in the later native inscriptions,
such as Nabonidus's estimate of the period of Khammurabi (or Hammuribi);
synchronisms, also furnished by the inscriptions, between kings of Babylon
and of Assyria; and the early Babylonian date-lists.

                              Dyn. I.        Dyn. II.         Dyn. III.
                             ---------       --------        ------------
                                 B.C.           B.C.             B.C.
  Oppert         (1888)      2506-2202       2202-1834        1834-1257
  Sayce          (1899)      2478-(2174)     2174-(1806)      1806-(1229)
    "            (1902)      2460-(2174)     2174-(1806)      1806-(1229)
  Rogers         (1900)      2454-2451       2150-1783        1782-1207
  Winckler       (1894)     (2425-2120)      2120-1752        1752-1177
    "            (1892)      2403-2098       2098-1730        1729-1150
    "            (1905)   c. 2400-2100    c. 2100-1700     c. 1700-1150
  Delitzsch      (1907)   c. 2420-2120    c. 2120-(1752)     (1752-1176)
    "            (1891)      2399-2094       2094-1726        1726-1150
  Maspero        (1897)      2416-2082       2082-1714        1714-(1137)
  Lehmann-Haupt  (1898)      2360-2057       2056-1689        1688-1113
    "      "     (1903)      2296-2009/8   2008/7-1691        1690-1115
  Marquart       (1899)      2335-2051     2051/0-1694/3    1693/2-1118/7
  Peiser         (1891)      2051-1947       1947-1579        1579-1180
  Rost           (1897)      2232-1928       1928-1560        1560-1224
    "            (1900)      2231-1941       1940-1573        1572-1179
  Hommel         (1901)      2223-1923      (1923-1752)       1752-1175
                          or 2050-1752        "     "
    "            (1895)      2058-1754                        1753-1178
    "            (1886)      2035-1731       2403-2035        1731-1154
                 (1898)      1884-1580                        1580-1180
  Niebuhr        (1896)      2193-1889       2114-1746        1746-1169

In view of the uncertainty regarding the length of Dynasties IV. and VIII.
of the Kings' List, attempts have been made to ascertain the dates of the
earlier dynasties by independent means. The majority of writers, after
fixing the date at which Dynasty III. closed by means of the synchronisms
and certain of the later chronological references, have accepted the
figures of the Kings' List for the earlier dynasties, ignoring their
apparent inconsistencies with the system of Berossus and with the
chronology of Nabonidus. Others have attempted to reconcile the conflicting
data by emendations of the figures and other ingenious devices. This will
explain the fact that while the difference between the earliest and latest
dates suggested for the close of Dynasty III. is only 144 years, the
difference between the earliest and latest dates suggested for the
beginning of Dynasty I. is no less than 622 years. A comparison of the
principal schemes of chronology that have been propounded may be made by
means of the preceding table. The first column gives the names of the
writers and the dates at which their schemes were published, while the
remaining columns give the dates they have suggested for Dynasties I., II.
and III. of the Kings' List.[6] The systems with the highest dates are
placed first in the list; where a writer has produced more than one system,
these are grouped together, the highest dates proposed by him determining
his place in the series.

Omitting that of Oppert, which to some extent stands in a category by
itself, the systems fall into three groups. The first group, comprising the
second to the sixth names, obtains its results by selecting the data on
which it relies and ignoring others. The second group, comprising the next
four names, attempts to reconcile the conflicting data by emending the
figures. The third group, consisting of the last two names, is
differentiated by its proposals with regard to Dynasty II. It will be noted
that the first group has obtained higher dates than the second, and the
second group higher dates on the whole than the third.

Oppert's system[7] represents the earliest dates that have been suggested.
He accepted the figures of the Kings' List and claimed that he reconciled
them with the figures of Berossus, though he ignored the later
chronological notices. But there is no evidence for his "cyclic date" of
2517 B.C., on which his system depended, and there is little doubt that the
beginning of the historical period of Berossus is to be set, not in 2506
B.C., but in 2232 B.C. The two systems of Sayce,[8] that of Rogers,[9] the
three systems of Winckler,[10] both those of Delitzsch,[11] and that of
Maspero,[12] may be grouped together, for they are based on the same
principle. Having first fixed the date of the close of Dynasty III., they
employed the figures of the Kings' List unemended for defining the earlier
periods, and did not attempt to reconcile their results with other
conflicting data. The difference of eighteen years in Sayce's two dates for
the rise of Dynasty I. was due to his employing in 1902 the figures
assigned to the first seven kings of the dynasty upon the larger of the two
contemporary date-lists, which had meanwhile been published, in place of
those given by the List of Kings. It should be noted that Winckler (1905)
and Delitzsch (1907) gives the dates only in round numbers.

A second group of systems may be said to consist of those proposed by
Lehmann-Haupt, Marquart, Peiser, and Rost, for these writers attempted to
get over the discrepancies in the data by emending some of the figures
furnished by the inscriptions. In 1891, with the object of getting the
total duration of the dynasties to agree with the chronological system of
Berossus and with the statement of Nabonidus concerning Khammurabi's date,
Peiser proposed to emend the figure given by the Kings' List for the length
of Dynasty III. The reading of "9 soss and 36 years," which gives the total
576 years, he suggested was a scribal error for "6 soss and 39 years"; he
thus reduced the length of Dynasty III. by 177 years and effected a
corresponding reduction in the dates assigned to Dynasties I. and II.[13]
In 1897 Rost followed up Peiser's suggestion by reducing the figure still
further, but he counteracted to some extent the effects of this additional
reduction by emending Sennacherib's date for Marduk-nadin-akh[=e]'s defeat
of Tiglath-pileser I. as engraved on the rock at Bavian, holding that the
figure "418," as engraved upon the rock, was a mistake for "478."[14]
Lehmann-Haupt's first system (1898) resembled those of Oppert, Sayce,
Rogers, Winckler, Delitzsch and Maspero in that he accepted the figures of
the Kings' List, and did not attempt to emend them. But he obtained his low
date for the close of Dynasty III. by emending [v.03 p.0110] Sennacherib's
figure in the Bavian inscription; this he reduced by a hundred years,[15]
instead of increasing it by sixty as Rost had suggested. Lehmann-Haupt's
influence is visible in Marquart's system, published in the following
year;[16] it may be noted that his slightly reduced figure for the
beginning of Dynasty I. was arrived at by incorporating the new information
supplied by the first date-list to be published. When revising his scheme
of chronology in 1900, Rost abandoned his suggested emendation of
Sennacherib's figure, but by decreasing his reduction of the length of
Dynasty III., he only altered his date for the beginning of Dynasty I. by
one year.[17] In his revised scheme of chronology, published in 1903,[18]
Lehmann-Haupt retained his emendation of Sennacherib's figure, and was in
his turn influenced by Marquart's method of reconciling the dynasties of
Berossus with the Kings' List. He continued to accept the figure of the
Kings' List for Dynasty III., but he reduced the length of Dynasty II. by
fifty years, arguing that the figures assigned to some of the reigns were
improbably high. His slight reduction in the length of Dynasty I. was
obtained from the recently published date-lists, though his proposed
reduction of Ammizaduga's reign to ten years has since been disproved.

A third group of systems comprises those proposed by Hommel and Niebuhr,
for their reductions in the date assigned to Dynasty I. were effected
chiefly by their treatment of Dynasty II. In his first system, published in
1886,[19] Hommel, mainly with the object of reducing Khammurabi's date,
reversed the order of the first two dynasties of the Kings' List, placing
Dynasty II. before Dynasty I. In his second and third systems (1895 and
1898),[20] and in his second alternative scheme of 1901 (see below), he
abandoned this proposal and adopted a suggestion of Halévy that Dynasty
III. followed immediately after Dynasty I.; Dynasty II., he suggested, had
either synchronized with Dynasty I., or was mainly apocryphal (_eine
spätere Geschichtskonstruction_). Niebuhr's system was a modification of
Hommel's second theory, for, instead of entirely ignoring Dynasty II., he
reduced its independent existence to 143 years, making it overlap Dynasty
I. by 225 years.[21] The extremely low dates proposed by Hommel in 1898
were due to his adoption of Peiser's emendation for the length of Dynasty
III., in addition to his own elimination of Dynasty II. In 1901 Hommel
abandoned Peiser's emendation and suggested two alternative schemes.[22]
According to one of these he attempted to reconcile Berossus with the
Kings' List by assigning to Dynasty II. an independent existence of some
171 years, while as a possible alternative he put forward what was
practically his theory of 1895.

Such are the principles underlying the various chronological schemes which
had, until recently, been propounded. The balance of opinion was in favour
of those of the first group of writers, who avoided emendations of the
figures and were content to follow the Kings' List and to ignore its
apparent discrepancies with other chronological data; but it is now
admitted that the general principle underlying the third group of theories
was actually nearer the truth. The publication of fresh chronological
material in 1906 and 1907 placed a new complexion on the problems at issue,
and enabled us to correct several preconceptions, and to reconcile or
explain the apparently conflicting data.

From a Babylonian chronicle in the British Museum[23] we now know that
Dynasty II. of the Kings' List never occupied the throne of Babylon, but
ruled only in the extreme south of Babylonia on the shores of the Persian
Gulf; that its kings were contemporaneous with the later kings of Dynasty
I. and with the earlier kings of Dynasty III. of the Kings' List; that in
the reign of Samsu-ditana, the last king of Dynasty I., Hittites from
Cappadocia raided and captured Babylon, which in her weakened state soon
fell a prey to the Kassites (Dynasty III.); and that later on southern
Babylonia, till then held by Dynasty II. of the Kings' List, was in its
turn captured by the Kassites, who from that time onward occupied the whole
of the Babylonian plain. The same chronicle informs us that Ilu-sh[=u]ma,
an early Assyrian patesi, was the contemporary of Su-abu, the founder of
Dynasty I. of the Kings' List, thus enabling us to trace the history of
Assyria back beyond the rise of Babylon.

Without going into details, the more important results of this new
information may be summarized: the elimination of Dynasty II. from the
throne of Babylon points to a date not much earlier than 2000 or 2050 B.C.
for the rise of Dynasty I., a date which harmonizes with the chronological
notices of Shalmaneser I.; Nabonidus's estimate of the period of
Khammurabi, so far from being centuries too low, is now seen to have been
exaggerated, as the context of the passage in his inscription suggests; and
finally the beginning of the historical period of Berossus is not to be
synchronized with Dynasty I. of the Kings' List, but, assuming that his
figures had an historical basis and that they have come down to us in their
original form, with some earlier dynasty which may possibly have had its
capital in one of the other great cities of Babylonia (such as the Dynasty
of Isin).

New data have also been discovered bearing upon the period before the rise
of Babylon. A fragment of an early dynastic chronicle from Nippur[24] gives
a list of the kings of the dynasties of Ur and Isin. From this text we
learn that the Dynasty of Ur consisted of five kings and lasted for 117
years, and was succeeded by the Dynasty of Isin, which consisted of sixteen
kings and lasted for 225½ years. Now the capture of the city of Isin by
R[=i]m-Sin, which took place in the seventeenth year of Sin-muballit, the
father of Khammurabi, formed an epoch for dating tablets in certain parts
of Babylonia,[25] and it is probable that we may identify the fall of the
Dynasty of Isin with this capture of the city. In that case the later
rulers of the Dynasty of Isin would have been contemporaneous with the
earlier rulers of Dynasty I. of the Kings' List, and we obtain for the rise
of the Dynasty of Ur a date not much earlier than 2300 B.C.

These considerable reductions in the dates of the earlier dynasties of
Babylonia necessarily react upon our estimate of the age of Babylonian
civilization. The very high dates of 5000 or 6000 B.C., formerly assigned
by many writers to the earliest remains of the Sumerians and the Babylonian
Semites,[26] depended to a great extent on the statement of Nabonidus that
3200 years separated his own age from that of Nar[=a]m-Sin, the son of
Sargon of Agade; for to Sargon, on this statement alone, a date of 3800
B.C. has usually been assigned. But even by postulating the highest
possible dates for the Dynasties of Babylon and Ur, enormous gaps occurred
in the scheme of chronology, which were unrepresented by any royal name or
record. In his valiant attempt to fill these gaps Radau was obliged to
invent kings and even dynasties,[27] the existence of which is now
definitely disproved. The statement of Nabonidus has not, however, been
universally accepted. Lehmann-Haupt suggested an emendation of the text,
reducing the number by a thousand years;[28] while Winckler has regarded
the statement of Nabonidus as an uncritical exaggeration.[29] Obviously the
scribes of Nabonidus were not anxious to diminish the antiquity of the
foundation-inscription of Nar[=a]m-Sin, which their royal master had
unearthed; [v.03 p.0111] and another reason for their calculations
resulting in so high a figure is suggested by the recent discoveries: they
may in all good faith have reckoned as consecutive a number of early
dynasties which were as a matter of fact contemporaneous. But, though we
may refuse to accept the accuracy of this figure of Nabonidus, it is not
possible at present to fix a definite date for the early kings of Agade.
All that can be said is that both archaeological and epigraphic evidence
indicates that no very long interval separated the empire of the Semitic
kings of Agade from that of the kings of Sumer and Akkad, whose rule was
inaugurated by the founding of the Dynasty of Ur.[30]

To use caution in accepting the chronological notices of the later kings is
very far removed from suggesting emendations of their figures. The emenders
postulate mechanical errors in the writing of the figures, but, equally
with those who accept them, regard the calculations of the native scribes
as above reproach. But that scribes could make mistakes in their reckoning
is definitely proved by the discovery at Shergat of two totally conflicting
accounts of the age and history of the great temple of Assur.[31] This
discovery in itself suggests that all chronological data are not to be
treated as of equal value and arranged mechanically like the pieces of a
Chinese puzzle; and further, that no more than a provisional acceptance
should be accorded any statement of the later native chronologists, until
confirmed by contemporary records. On the other hand, the death-blow has
been given to the principle of emendation of the figures, which for so long
has found favour among a considerable body of German writers.

(L. W. K.)

IX. _Proper Names._--In the early days of the decipherment of the cuneiform
inscriptions, the reading of the proper names borne by Babylonians and
Assyrians occasioned great difficulties; and though most of these
difficulties have been overcome and there is general agreement among
scholars as to the principles underlying both the formation and the
pronunciation of the thousands of names that we encounter in historical
records, business documents, votive inscriptions and literary productions,
differences, though mostly of a minor character, still remain. Some time
must elapse before absolute uniformity in the transliteration of these
proper names is to be expected; and since different scholars still adopt
varying spellings of Babylonian and Assyrian proper names, it has been
considered undesirable in this work to ignore the fact in individual
articles contributed by them. The better course seems to be to explain here
the nature of these variations.

The main difficulty in the reading of Babylonian and Assyrian proper names
arises from the preference given to the "ideographic" method of writing
them. According to the developed cuneiform system of writing, words may be
written by means of a sign (or combination of signs) expressive of the
entire word, or they may be spelled out phonetically in syllables. So, for
example, the word for "name" may be written by a sign MU, or it may be
written cut by two signs _shu-mu_, the one sign MU representing the
"Sumerian" word for "name," which, however, in the case of a Babylonian or
Assyrian text must be read as _shumu_--the Semitic equivalent of the
Sumerian MU. Similarly the word for "clothing" may be written SIG-BA, which
represents again the "Sumerian" word, whereas, the Babylonian-Assyrian
equivalent being _lubushtu_ it is so to be read in Semitic texts, and may
therefore be also phonetically written _lu-bu-ush-tu_. This double method
of writing words arises from the circumstance that the cuneiform syllabary
is of non-Semitic origin, the system being derived from the non-Semitic
settlers of the Euphrates valley, commonly termed Sumerians (or
Sumero-Akkadians), to whom, as the earlier settlers, the origin of the
cuneiform script is due. This script, together with the general Sumerian
culture, was taken over by the Babylonians upon their settlement in the
Euphrates valley and adapted to their language, which belonged to the
Semitic group. In this transfer the Sumerian words--largely
monosyllabic--were reproduced, but read as Semitic, and at the same time
the advance step was taken of utilizing the Sumerian words as means of
writing the Babylonian words phonetically. In this case the signs
representing Sumerian words were treated merely as syllables, and, without
reference to their meaning, utilized for spelling Babylonian words. The
Babylonian syllabary which thus arose, and which, as the culture passed on
to the north--known as Assyria--became the Babylonian Assyrian
syllabary,[32] was enlarged and modified in the course of time, the Semitic
equivalents for many of the signs being distorted or abbreviated to form
the basis of new "phonetic" values that were thus of "Semitic" origin; but,
on the whole, the "non-Semitic" character of the signs used as syllables in
the phonetic method of writing Semitic words was preserved; and,
furthermore, down to the latest days of the Babylonian and Assyrian empires
the mixed method of writing continued, though there were periods when
"purism" was the fashion, and there was a more marked tendency to spell out
the words laboriously in preference to using signs with a phonetic
complement as an aid in suggesting the reading desired in any given
instance. Yet, even in those days, the Babylonian syllabary continued to be
a mixture of ideographic and phonetic writing. Besides the conventional use
of certain signs as the indications of names of gods, countries, cities,
vessels, birds, trees, &c., which, known as "determinants," are the
Sumerian signs of the terms in question and were added as a guide for the
reader, proper names more particularly continued to be written to a large
extent in purely "ideographic" fashion. The conservatism which is a feature
of proper names everywhere, in consequence of which the archaic traits of a
language are frequently preserved in them, just as they are preserved in
terms used in the ritual and in poetic diction, is sufficient to account
for the interesting fact that the Semitic settlers of the Euphrates valley
in handing down their names from one generation to another retained the
custom of writing them in "Sumerian" fashion, or, as we might also put it,
in "ideographic" form. Thus the name of the deity, which enters as an
element in a large proportion of the proper names,[33] was almost
invariably written with the sign or signs representing this deity, and it
is only exceptionally that the name is spelled phonetically. Thus the name
of the chief god of the Babylonian pantheon, Marduk, is written by two
signs to be pronounced AMAR-UD, which describe the god as the "young
bullock of the day"--an allusion to the solar character of the god in
question. The moon-god Sin is written by a sign which has the force of
"thirty," and is a distinct reference to the monthly course of the planet;
or the name is written by two signs to be pronounced EN-ZU, which describe
the god as the "lord of wisdom." The god Nebo appears as PA--the sign of
the stylus, which is associated with this deity as the originator and
patron of writing and of knowledge in general,--or it is written with a
sign AK, which describes the god as a "creator."

Until, therefore, through parallel passages or through explanatory lists
prepared by the Babylonian and Assyrian scribes in large numbers as an aid
for the study of the language,[34] the exact phonetic reading of these
divine names was determined, scholars remained in doubt or had recourse to
conjectural or provisional readings. Even at the present time there are
many names of deities, as, _e.g._ Ninib, the phonetic reading of which is
still unknown or uncertain. In most cases, however, these belong to the
category of minor deities or represent old local gods assimilated to some
more powerful god, who absorbed, as it were, the attributes and
prerogatives of these minor ones. In many cases they will probably turn out
to be descriptive epithets of gods [v.03 p.0112] already known rather than
genuine proper names. A peculiar difficulty arises in the case of the god
of storms, who, written IM, was generally known in Babylonia as Ramman,
"the thunderer," whereas in Assyria he also had the designation Adad. In
many cases, therefore, we may be in doubt how the sign IM is to be read,
more particularly since this same god appears to have had other
designations besides Ramman and Adad.

Besides the divine element, proper names as a rule in the
Babylonian-Assyrian periods had a verbal form attached and a third element
representing an object. Even when the sign indicative of the verb is
clearly recognised there still remains to be determined the form of the
verb intended. Thus in the case of the sign KUR, which is the equivalent of
_na[s.][=a]ru_, "protect," there is the possibility of reading it as the
active participle _n[=a][s.]ir_, or as an imperative _u[s.][s.]ur_, or even
the third person perfect _i[s.][s.]ur_. Similarly in the case of the sign
MU, which, besides signifying "name" as above pointed out, is also the
Sumerian word for "give," and therefore may be read _iddin_, "he gave,"
from _nad[=a]nu_, or may be read _n[=a]din_, "giver"; and when, as actually
happens, a name occurs in which the first element is the name of a deity
followed by MU-MU, a new element of doubt is introduced through the
uncertainty whether the first MU is to be taken as a form of the verb
_nad[=a]nu_ and the second as the noun _shumu_, "name," or vice versa.

Fortunately, in the case of a large number of names occurring on business
documents as the interested parties or as scribes or as witnesses--and it
is through these documents that we obtain the majority of the
Babylonian-Assyrian proper names--we have variant readings, the same name
being written phonetically in whole or part in one instance and
ideographically in another. Certain classes of names being explained in
this way, legitimate and fairly reliable conclusions can be drawn for many
others belonging to the same class or group. The proper names of the
numerous business documents of the Khammurabi period, when phonetic writing
was the fashion, have been of special value in resolving doubts as to the
correct reading of names written ideographically. Thus names like
_Sin-na-di-in-shu-mi_ and _Bel-na-di-in-shu-mi_, _i.e._ "Sin is the giver
of a name" (_i.e._ offspring), and "Bel is the giver of a name," form the
model for names with deities as the first element followed by MU-MU, even
though the model may not be consistently followed in all cases. In
historical texts also variant readings occur in considerable number. Thus,
to take a classic example, the name of the famous king Nebuchadrezzar
occurs written in the following different manners:--(a)
_Na-bi-um-ku-du-ur-ri-u-[s.]u-ur_, (b) AK-DU-_u-[s.]u-ur_, (c)
AK-_ku-dur-ri_-SHES, and (d) PA-GAR-DU-SHES, from which we are permitted to
conclude that PA or AK (with the determinative for deity AN) = _Na-bi-um_
or Nebo, that GAR-DU or DU alone = _kudurri_, and that SHES =
_u[s.][s.]ur_. The second element signifies "boundary" or "territory"; the
third element is the imperative of _nasaru_, "protect"; so that the whole
name signifies, "O, Nebo! protect my boundary" (or "my territory").

It is not the purpose of this note to set forth the principles underlying
the formation of proper names among the Babylonians and Assyrians, but it
may not be out of place to indicate that by the side of such full names,
containing three elements (or even more), we have already at an early
period the reduction of these elements to two through the combination of
the name of a deity with a verbal form merely, or through the omission of
the name of the deity. From such names it is only a step to names of one
element, a characteristic feature of which is the frequent addition of an
ending _-tum_ (feminine), _[=a]n_, _[=a]_, _um_, _atum_, _atija_, _sha,_
&c., most of these being "hypocoristic affixes," corresponding in a measure
to modern pet-names.

Lastly, a word about genuine or pseudo-Sumerian names. In the case of texts
from the oldest historical periods we encounter hundreds of names that are
genuinely Sumerian, and here in view of the multiplicity of the phonetic
values attaching to the signs used it is frequently difficult definitely to
determine the reading of the names. Our knowledge of the ancient Sumerian
language is still quite imperfect, despite the considerable progress made,
more particularly during recent years. It is therefore not surprising that
scholars should differ considerably in the reading of Sumerian names, where
we have not helps at our command as for Babylonian and Assyrian names.
Changes in the manner of reading the Sumerian names are frequent. Thus the
name of a king of Ur, generally read Ur-Bau until quite recently, is now
read Ur-Engur; for Lugal-zaggisi, a king of Erech, some scholars still
prefer to read Ungal-zaggisi; the name of a famous political and religious
centre generally read Shir-pur-la is more probably to be read Shir-gul-la;
and so forth. There is reason, however, to believe that the uncertainty in
regard to many of these names will eventually be resolved into reasonable
certainty. A doubt also still exists in regard to a number of names of the
older period because of the uncertainty whether their bearers were
Sumerians or Semites. If the former, then their names are surely to be read
as Sumerian, while, if they were Semites, the signs with which the names
are written are probably to be read according to their Semitic equivalents,
though we may also expect to encounter Semites bearing genuine Sumerian
names. At times too a doubt may exist in regard to a name whose bearer was
a Semite, whether the signs composing his name represent a phonetic reading
or an ideographic compound. Thus, _e.g._ when inscriptions of a Semitic
ruler of Kish, whose name was written Uru-mu-ush, were first deciphered,
there was a disposition to regard this as an ideographic form and to read
phonetically Alu-usharshid ("he founded a city," with the omission of the
name of the deity), but scholarly opinion finally accepted Uru-mu-ush
(Urumush) as the correct designation.

For further details regarding the formation of Sumerian and
Babylonian-Assyrian proper names, as well as for an indication of the
problems involved and the difficulties still existing, especially in the
case of Sumerian names,[35] see the three excellent works now at our
disposal for the Sumerian, the old Babylonian, and the neo-Babylonian
period respectively, by Huber, _Die Personennamen in den
Keilschrifturkunden aus der Zeit der Könige von Ur und Nisin_ (Leipzig,
1907); Ranke, _Early Babylonian Proper Names_ (Philadelphia, 1905); and
Tallqvist, _Neu-Babylonisches Namenbuch_ (Helsingfors, 1905).

(M. JA.)

[Plate I.]     [Plate II.]

[1] For a survey of the chronological systems adopted by different modern
scholars, see below, section viii. "Chronological Systems."

[2] The compiler of the more complete one seems to have allowed himself
liberties. At all events he gives 30 years of reign to Sin-muballidh
instead of the 20 assigned to him in a list of dates drawn up at the time
of Ammi-zadok's accession, 55 years to Khammurabi instead of 43, and 35
years to Samsu-iluna instead of 38, while he omits altogether the seven
years' reign of the Assyrian king Tukulti-In-aristi at Babylon.

[3] They are also called high-priests of Gunammid[=e] and a contract-tablet
speaks of "T[=e] in Babylon," but this was probably not the T[=e] of the
seal. It must be remembered that the reading of most of the early Sumerian
proper names is merely provisional, as we do not know how the ideographs of
which they are composed were pronounced in either Sumerian or Assyrian.

[4] For the events leading up to the conquests of Cyrus, see PERSIA:
_Ancient History_, § v. The chronology is not absolutely certain.

[5] The following is a list of the later dynasties and kings of Babylonia
and Assyria so far as they are known at present. For the views of other
writers on the chronology, see § viii., _Chronological Systems._

  _The Babylonian Dynasties from cir._ 2500 B.C.

  _Dynasty of Ur._

    Gungunu, _cir._ 2500 B.C.
    Ur-Gur.
    Dungi, more than 51 years.
    Bur-Sin, more than 12 years.
    Gimil-Sin, more than 9 years.
    Ibi-Sin.
    Idin-Dagan.
    Sumu-ilu.

  _First Dynasty of Babylon._ 2350 B.C.

    Sumu-abi, 14 years.
    Sumu-la-ilu, 36 years.
    Zabium, 14 years.
    Abil-Sin, 18 years.
    Sin-muballidh, 20 years.
    Khammurabi, 43 years.
    Samsu-iluna, 38 years.
    Abesukh, 25 years.
    Ammi-ditana, 25 years.
    Ammi-zadoq, 21 years.
    Samsu-ditana, 31 years.

  _Dynasty of Sisku (?) for 368 years._ 2160 B.C.

    Anman, 60 years.
    Ki-Nigas, 56 years.
    Damki-ilisu, 26 years.
    Iskipal, 15 years.
    Sussi, 27 years.
    Gul-ki[sar], 55 years.
    Kirgal-daramas, 50 years.
    [=A]-dara-kalama, 28 years.
    Akur-duana, 26 years.
    Melamma-kurkura, 8 years.
    Ea-ga(mil), 9 years.

  _Kassite Dynasty of 36 kings for 576 years 9 months._ 1780 B.C.

    Gandis, 16 years.
    Agum-sipak, 22 years.
    Bitilyasu I., 22 years.
    Ussi (?), 9 years.
    Adu-metas.
    Tazzi-gurumas.
    Agum-kakrime.
        .    .    .    .
    Kara-indas.
    Kadasman-Bel, his son, corresponded with
      Amon-hotep (Amenophis) III. of Egypt, 1400 B.C.
    Kuri-galzu II.
    Burna-buryas, his son, 22 years.
    Kuri-galzu III., his son, 26 years.
    Nazi-Maruttas, his son, 17 years.
    Kadasman-Turgu, his son, 13 years.
    Kudur-bel, 6 years.
    Sagarakti-suryas, his son, 13 years.
    Bitilyasu II., 8 years.
    Tukulti-In-aristi of Assyria (1272 B.C.)
      for 7 years, native vassal kings being--
    Bel-sum-iddin, 1½ years.
    Kadasman-Bel II., 1½ years.
    Hadad-sum-iddin, 6 years.
    Hadad-sum-uzur, 30 years.
    Meli-sipak, 15 years.
    Merodach-baladan I., his son, 13 years.
    Zamama-sum-iddin, 1 year.
    Bel-sum-iddin, 3 years.

  _Dynasty of Isin of 11 kings for 132½ years._ 1203 B.C.

    Merodach-... 18 years.
        .    .    .    .
    Nebuchadrezzar I.
    Bel-nadin-pal.
    Merodach-nadin-akhi, 22 years.
    Merodach-... 1½ years.
    Hadad-baladan, an usurper.
    Merodach-sapik-zer-mati, 12 years.
    Nabu-nadin, 8 years.

  _Dynasty of the Sea-coast._ 1070 B.C.

    Simbar-sipak, 18 years.
    Ea-mukin-zeri, 5 months.
    Kassu-nadin-akhi, 3 years.

  _Dynasty of Bit-Bazi._ 1050 B.C.

    [=E]-Ulmas-sakin-sumi, 17 years.
    Ninip-kudur-uzur I., 3 years.
    Silanim-Suqamuna, 3 months.

  _Dynasty of Elam._ 1030 B.C.

    An Elamite, 6 years.

  _Second Dynasty of Babylon._ 1025 B.C.

    Nebo-kin-abli, 36 years.
    Ninip-kudur-uzur II. (?) 8 months 12 days.
    Probably 5 names missing.                    B.C.
    Samas-mudammiq                        _cir._ 920
    Nebo-sum-iskun                        _cir._ 900
    Nebo-baladan                          _cir._ 880
    Merodach-nadin-sumi                   _cir._ 860
    Merodach-baladhsu-iqbi                _cir._ 830
    Bau-akhi-iddin                        _cir._ 810
    Probably 2 names missing.
    Nebo-sum-iskun, son of Dakuri         _cir._ 760
    Nabonassar, 14 years                         747
    Nebo-nadin-suma, his son, 2 years            733
    Nebo-sum-yukin, his son, 1 month 12 days     731
        End of "the 22nd dynasty."

  _Dynasty of Sape._
                                                 B.C.
    Yukin-zera or Chinziros, 3 years.            730
    Pulu (Pul or Poros), called
      Tiglath-pileser III. in Assyria, 2 years   727
    Ulul[=a], called Shalmaneser IV. in Assyria  725
    Merodach-baladan II. the Chaldaean           721
    Sargon of Assyria                            709
    Sennacherib, his son                         705
    Merodach-zakir-sumi, 1 month                 702
    Merodach-baladan III., 6 months              702
    Bel-ebus of Babylon                          702
    Assur-nadin-sumi, son of Sennacherib         700
    Nergal-yusezib                               694
    Musezib-Merodach                             693
    Sennacherib destroys Babylon                 689
    Esar-haddon, his son                         681
    Samas-sum-yukin, his son                     668
    Kandalanu (Kineladanos)                      648
    Nabopolassar                                 626
    Nabu-kudur-uzur (Nebuchadrezzar II.)         605
    Amil-Marduk (Evil-Merodach), his son         562
    Nergal-sarra-uzur (Nergal-sharezer)          560
    Labasi-Marduk, his son, 3 months             556
    Nabu-nahid (Nabonidus)                       556
    Cyrus conquers Babylon                       538
    Cambyses, his son                            529
    Gomates, the Magian, 7 months                521
    Nebuchadrezzar III., native king             521
    Darius, son of Hystaspes                     520
    Nebuchadrezzar IV., rebel king               514
    Darius restored                              513

                      _Kings of Assyria._

    Zulilu "founder of the monarchy."
        .    .    .    .
    Assur-rabi.
    Assur-nirari, his son.
    Assur-rim-nisesu, his son.
        .    .    .    .
    Erba-Hadad,
    Assur-nadin-akhi I., his son.
    Assur-yuballidh I., his son.
                                      B.C.
    Assur-bil-nisi-su          _cir._ 1450
    Buzur-Assur                       1440
    Assur-nadin-akhi II.              1410
    Assur-yuballidh, his son          1390
    Bel-nirari, his son               1370
    Arik-den-ilu, his son             1350
    Hadad-nirari I., his son          1330
    Shalmaneser I., his son
      (built Calah)                   1310
    Tiglath-In-aristi I., his son,    1280
      conquers Babylon         _cir._ 1270
    Assur-nazir-pal I., his son       1260
    Assur-narara and his son
      Nebo-dan                        1250
    Assur-sum-lisir                   1235
    In-aristi-tukulti-Assur           1225
    Bel-kudur-uzur                    1215
    In-aristi-pileser, descendant
      of Erba-Hadad                   1200
    Assur-dan I., his son             1185
    Mutaggil-Nebo, his son            1160
    Assur-ris-isi, his son            1140
    Tiglath-pileser I., his son       1120
    Assur-bil-kala, his son           1090
    Samsi-Hadad I., his brother       1070
    Assur-nazir-pal II., his son      1060
    Assur-irbi                          --
    Hadad-nirari II.           _cir._  960
    Tiglath-pileser II., his son       950
    Assur-dan II., his son             930
    Hadad-nirari III., his son         911
    Tukulti-In-aristi, his son         889
    Assur-nazir-pal III., his son      883
    Shalmaneser II., his son           858
    Assur-danin-pal (Sardanapallos),
      rebel king                       825
    Samsi-Hadad II., his brother       823
    Hadad-nirari IV., his son          810
    Shalmaneser III.                   781
    Assur-dan III.                     771
    Assur-nirari                       753
    Pulu, usurper, takes the
      name of Tiglath-pileser III.     745
    Ulul[=a], usurper, takes the
      name of Shalmaneser IV.          727
    Sargon, usurper                    722
    Sennacherib, his son               705
    Esar-haddon, his son               681
    Assur-bani-pal, his son            668
    Assur-etil-ilani-yukin, his son     ?
    Assur-sum-lisir                     ?
    Sin-sarra-uzur (Sarakos)            ?
    Destruction of Nineveh             606

[6] These three dynasties are usually known as the First Dynasty of
Babylon, the Dynasty of Sisku or Uruku, and the Kassite Dynasty; see sect.
v.

[7] See Oppert, _Comptes rendus de l'Acad. des Inscr. et Belles-Lettres_
(1888), xvi. pp. 218 ff., and _Bab. and Or. Rec._ ii. pp. 107 ff.

[8] See Sayce, _Early Israel_, pp. 281 ff., and _Encyc. Brit._, 10th ed.,
vol. xxvi. p. 45 (also his account above).

[9] See Rogers _History of Babylonia and Assyria_ (1900).

[10] See Winckler, _Geschichte Babyloniens und Assyriens_ (1892),
_Altorientalische Forschungen_, i. Hft. 2 (1894), and _Auszug aus der
Vorderasiatischen Geschichte_ (1905).

[11] See Delitzsch and Mürdter, _Geschichte Babyloniens und Assyriens_
(1891), and Delitzsch, _Mehr Licht_ (1907).

[12] See Maspero, _Histoire ancienne des peuples de l'Orient classique_,
tome ii.

[13] See Peiser, _Zeits. für Assyr._ vi. pp. 264 ff.

[14] See Rost, _Mitteil. der vorderas. Gesellschaft_ (1897), ii.

[15] See Lehmann-Haupt, _Zwei Hauptprobleme_ (1898).

[16] See Marquart, _Philologus_, Supplbd. vii. (1899), pp. 637 ff.

[17] See Rost, _Orient. Lit.-Zeit._, iii. (1900), No. 6.

[18] See Lehmann-Haupt, _Beiträge zur alten Geschichte (Klio)_, Bd. iii.
Heft 1 (1903).

[19] See Hommel, _Geschichte Babyloniens und Assyriens_.

[20] See _Ancient Hebrew Tradition_, p. 125, and Hastings' _Dictionary of
the Bible_, i. pp. 226 f.

[21] See Niebuhr, _Chronologie_ (1896).

[22] See Hommel, "Sitzungsberichte der königl. böhmischen Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften," _Phil.-hist. Classe_ (1901), v.

[23] Published and discussed by L. W. King, "Chronicles concerning early
Babylonian Kings" (_Studies in Eastern History_, vols. ii. and iii., 1907),
and _History of Egypt_, vol. xiii. (published by the Grolier Society, New
York, in the spring of 1906), pp. 244 ff.

[24] Published and discussed by Hilprecht, "Mathematical, Metrological and
Chronological Texts" (_Bab. Exped._, Ser. A, xx. 1, dated 1906, published
1907), pp. 46 ff.

[25] See L. W. King, _Letters and Inscriptions of Khammurabi_, vol. iii.
pp. 228 ff.

[26] Cf., _e.g._, Hilprecht, _Old Babylonian Inscriptions_, pt. ii. p. 24.

[27] See Radau, _Early Babylonian History_ (1900).

[28] See Lehmann-Haupt, _Zwei Hauptprobleme_, pp. 172 ff.

[29] See Winckler in Schrader's _Keilinschriften und das Alte-Testament_
(3rd ed.), i. pp. 17 f., and cf. _Mitteil. der vorderas. Gesellschaft_
(1906), i. p. 12, n.l.

[30] Cf. L. W. King, _Chronicles_, i. pp. 15 ff., 61 f.

[31] See _Mitteilungen der deutschen Orientgesellschaft_, Nos. 21 and 22,
and cf. L. W. King, Chronicles, i. pp. 114 ff.

[32] The Assyrian language is practically identical with the Babylonian,
just as the Assyrians are the same people as the Babylonians with some
foreign admixtures.

[33] In many names the divine element is lopped off, but was originally
present.

[34] Aramaic endorsements on business documents repeating in Aramaic
transliteration the names of parties mentioned in the texts have also been
of service in fixing the phonetic readings of names. See _e.g._ Clay's
valuable article, "Aramaic Endorsements on the Documents of Murash[=u]
Sons" (Persian period) in _Old Testament and Semitic Studies in Memory of
William Rainey Harper_ (Chicago, 1908, vol. i.), pp. 285-322.

[35] Even in the case of the "Semitic" name of the famous Sargon I.
(_q.v._), whose full name is generally read Sharru-kenu-sha-ali, and
interpreted as "the legitimate king of the city," the question has recently
been raised whether we ought not to read "Sharru-kenu-shar-ri" and
interpret as "the legitimate king rules"--an illustration of the
vacillation still prevailing in this difficult domain of research.

BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN RELIGION. The development of the religion of
Babylonia, so far as it can be traced with the material at hand, follows
closely along the lines of the periods to be distinguished in the history
of the Euphrates valley. Leaving aside the primitive phases of the religion
as lying beyond the ken of historical investigation, we may note the sharp
distinction to be made between the pre-Khammurabic age and the
post-Khammurabic age. While the political movement represented by
Khammurabi may have been proceeding for some time prior to the appearance
of the great conqueror, the period of _c._ 2250 B.C., when the union of the
Euphratean states was effected by Khammurabi, marks the beginning of a new
epoch in the religion as well as in the political history of the Euphrates
valley. Corresponding to the states into which we find the country divided
before 2250 B.C., we have a various number of religious centres such as
Nippur, Erech, Kutha (Cuthah), Ur, Sippara (Sippar), Shirgulla (Lagash),
Eridu and Agade, in each of which some god was looked upon as the chief
deity around whom there were gathered a number of minor deities and with
whom there was invariably associated a female consort. The jurisdiction of
this chief god was, however, limited to the political extent or control of
the district in which the main seat of the cult of the deity in question
lay. Mild attempts, to be sure, to group the chief deities associated with
the most important religious and political centres into a regular pantheon
were made--notably in Nippur and later in Ur--but such attempts lacked the
enduring quality which attaches to Khammurabi's avowed policy to raise
Marduk--the patron deity of the future capital, Babylon--to the head of the
entire Babylonian pantheon, as [v.03 p.0113] Babylon itself came to be
recognized as the real centre of the entire Euphrates valley.

Associated with Marduk was his consort Sarpanit, and grouped around the
pair as princes around a throne were the chief deities of the older
centres, like Ea and Damkina of Eridu, Nebo and Tashmit of Borsippa, Nergal
and Allatu of Kutha, Shamash and [=A] of Sippar, Sin and Ningal of Ur, as
well as pairs like Ramman (or Adad) and Shala whose central seat is unknown
to us. In this process of accommodating ancient prerogatives to new
conditions, it was inevitable that attributes belonging specifically to the
one or the other of these gods should have been transferred to Marduk, who
thus from being, originally, a solar deity becomes an eclectic power,
taking on the traits of Bel, Ea, Shamash, Nergal, Adad and even Sin (the
moon-god)--a kind of composite residuum of all the chief gods.

In the religious literature this process can be traced with perfect
definiteness. The older incantations, associated with Ea, were re-edited so
as to give to Marduk the supreme power over demons, witches and sorcerers:
the hymns and lamentations composed for the cult of Bel, Shamash and of
Adad were transformed into paeans and appeals to Marduk, while the ancient
myths arising in the various religious and political centres underwent a
similar process of adaptation to changed conditions, and as a consequence
their original meaning was obscured by the endeavour to assign all mighty
deeds and acts, originally symbolical of the change of seasons or of
occurrences in nature, to the patron deity of Babylon--the supreme head of
the entire Babylonian pantheon. Besides the chief deities and their
consorts, various minor ones, representing likewise patron gods of less
important localities and in most cases of a solar character were added at
one time or the other to the court of Marduk, though there is also to be
noted a tendency on the part of the chief solar deity, Shamash of Sippara,
and for the chief moon-god to absorb the solar and lunar deities of less
important sites, leading in the case of the solar gods to the
differentiation of the functions of Shamash during the various seasons of
the year and the various times of the day among these minor deities. In
this way Ninib, whose chief seat appears to have been at Shirgulla
(Lagash), became the sun-god of the springtime and of the morning, bringing
joy and new life to the earth, while Nergal of Kutha was regarded as the
sun of the summer solstice and of the noonday heat--the harbinger of
suffering and death.

There were, however, two deities who appear to have retained an independent
existence--Anu (_q.v._), the god of heaven, and Ishtar (_q.v._), the great
mother-goddess, who symbolized fertility and vitality in general. There are
some reasons for believing that the oldest seat, and possibly the original
seat, of the Anu cult was in Erech, as it is there where the Ishtar cult
that subsequently spread throughout Babylonia and Assyria took its rise.
While Anu, with whom there was associated as a pale reflection a consort
Antum, assigned to him under the influence of the widely prevalent view
among the early Semites which conceived of gods always in pairs, remained
more or less of an abstraction during the various periods of the
Babylonian-Assyrian religion and taking little part in the active cult of
the temples, his unique position as the chief god of the highest heavens
was always recognized in the theological system developed by the priests,
which found an expression in making him the first figure of a triad,
consisting of Anu, Bel and Ea, among whom the priests divided the three
divisions of the universe, the heavens, the earth with the atmosphere above
it, and the watery expanse respectively.

Postponing the discussion of this triad, it is to be noted that the
systematization of the pantheon after the days of Khammurabi did not
seriously interfere with the independence of the goddess Ishtar. While
frequently associated with Marduk, and still more closely with the chief
god of Assyria, the god Assur (who occupies in the north the position
accorded to Marduk in the south), so much so as to be sometimes spoken of
as Assur's consort--the lady or Belit _par excellence_--the belief that as
the source of all life she stands apart never lost its hold upon the people
and found an expression also in the system devised by the priests. By the
side of the first triad, consisting of Anu, Bel and Ea--disconnected in
this form entirely from all local associations--we encounter a second triad
composed of Shamash, Sin and Ishtar. As the first triad symbolized the
three divisions of the universe--the heavens, earth and the watery
element--so the second represented the three great forces of nature--the
sun, the moon and the life-giving power. According as the one or the other
aspect of such a power is brought into the foreground, Ishtar becomes the
mother of mankind, the fertile earth, the goddess of sexual love, and the
creative force among animals, while at times she appears in hymns and myths
as the general personification of nature.

We thus find in the post-Khammurabic period the pantheon assuming distinct
shapes. The strong tendency towards concentrating in one deity--Marduk--the
attributes of all others was offset by the natural desire to make the
position of Marduk accord with the rank acquired by the secular rulers. As
these emphasized their supremacy by grouping around them a court of loyal
attendants dependent in rank and ready to do their master's bidding, so the
gods of the chief centres and those of the minor local cults formed a group
around Marduk; and the larger the group the greater was the reflected glory
of the chief figure. Hence throughout the subsequent periods of Babylonian
history, and despite a decided progress towards a monotheistic conception
of divine government of the universe, the recognition of a large number of
gods and their consorts by the side of Marduk remained a firmly embedded
doctrine in the Babylonian religion as it did in the Assyrian religion,
with the important variation, however, of transferring the rôle of the head
of the pantheon from Marduk to Assur. Originally the patron god of the city
of Assur (_q.v._), when this city became the centre of a growing and
independent district, Assur was naturally advanced to the same position in
the north that Marduk occupied in the south. The religious predominance of
the city of Babylon served to maintain for Marduk recognition even on the
part of the Assyrian rulers, who, on the political side likewise, conceded
to Babylonia the form at least of an independent district even when, as
kings of Assyria, they exercised absolute control over it. They appointed
their sons or brothers governors of Babylonia, and in the long array of
titles that the kings gave themselves, a special phrase was always set
aside to indicate their mastery over Babylonia. "To take the hand of
Bel-Marduk" was the ceremony of installation which Assyrian rulers
recognized equally with Babylonians as an essential preliminary to
exercising authority in the Euphrates valley. Marduk and Assur became
rivals only when Babylonia gave the Assyrians trouble; and when in 689 B.C.
Sennacherib, whose patience had been exhausted by the difficulties
encountered in maintaining peace in the south, actually besieged and
destroyed the city of Babylon, he removed the statue of Marduk to Nineveh
as a symbol that the god's rule had come to an end. His grandson
Assur-bani-pal, with a view of re-establishing amicable relations, restored
the statue to the temple E-Saggila in Babylon and performed the
time-honoured ceremony of "taking the hand of Bel" as a symbol of his
homage to the ancient head of the Babylonian pantheon.

But for the substitution of Assur for Marduk, the Assyrian pantheon was the
same as that set up in the south, though some of the gods were endowed with
attributes which differ slightly from those which mark the same gods in the
south. The warlike nature of the Assyrians was reflected in their
conceptions of the gods, who thus became little Assurs by the side of the
great protector of arms, the big Assur. The cult and ritual in the north
likewise followed the models set up in the south. The hymns composed for
the temples of Babylonia were transferred to Assur, Calah, Harran, Arbela
and Nineveh in the north; and the myths and legends also wandered to
Assyria, where, to be sure, they underwent certain modifications. To all
practical purposes, however, the religion of Assyria was identical with
that practised in the south.

We thus obtain four periods in the development of the Babylonian-Assyrian
religion: (1) the oldest period from [v.03 p.0114] _c._ 3500 B.C. to the
time of Khammurabi (_c._ 2250 B.C.); (2) the post-Khammurabic period in
Babylonia; (3) the Assyrian period (_c._ 2000 B.C.) to the destruction of
Nineveh in 606 B.C.; (4) the neo-Babylonian period beginning with
Nabopolassar (625-604 B.C.), the first independent ruler under whom
Babylonia inaugurates a new though short-lived era of power and prosperity,
which ends with Cyrus's conquest of Babylon and Babylonia in 539 B.C.,
though since the religion proceeds on its undisturbed course for several
centuries after the end of the political independence, we might
legitimately carry this period to the Greek conquest of the Euphrates
valley (331 B.C.), when new influences began to make themselves felt which
gradually led to the extinction of the old cults.

In this long period of _c._ 3500 to _c._ 300 B.C., the changes introduced
after the adjustment to the new conditions produced by Khammurabi's union
of the Euphratean states are of a minor character. As already indicated,
the local cults in the important centres of the south and north maintained
themselves despite the tendency towards centralization, and while the cults
themselves varied according to the character of the gods worshipped in each
centre, the general principles were the same and the rites differed in
minor details rather than in essential variations. An important factor
which thus served to maintain the rites in a more or less stable condition
was the predominance of what may be called the astral theology as the
theoretical substratum of the Babylonian religion, and which is equally
pronounced in the religious system of Assyria. The essential feature of
this astral theology is the assumption of a close link between the
movements going on in the heavens and occurrences on earth, which led to
identifying the gods and goddesses with heavenly bodies--planets and stars,
besides sun and moon--and to assigning the seats of all the deities in the
heavens. The personification of the two great luminaries--the sun and the
moon--was the first step in the unfolding of this system, and this was
followed by placing the other deities where Shamash and Sin had their
seats. This process, which reached its culmination in the post-Khammurabic
period, led to identifying the planet Jupiter with Marduk, Venus with
Ishtar, Mars with Nergal, Mercury with Nebo, and Saturn with Ninib. The
system represents a harmonious combination of two factors, one of popular
origin, the other the outcome of speculation in the schools attached to the
temples of Babylonia. The popular factor is the belief in the influence
exerted by the movements of the heavenly bodies on occurrences on earth--a
belief naturally suggested by the dependence of life, vegetation and
guidance upon the two great luminaries. Starting with this belief the
priests built up the theory of the close correspondence between occurrences
on earth and phenomena in the heavens. The heavens presenting a constant
change even to the superficial observer, the conclusion was drawn of a
connexion between the changes and the ever-changing movement in the fate of
individuals and of nature as well as in the appearance of nature.

To read the signs of the heavens was therefore to understand the meaning of
occurrences on earth, and with this accomplished it was also possible to
foretell what events were portended by the position and relationship to one
another of sun, moon, planets and certain stars. Myths that symbolized
changes in season or occurrences in nature were projected on the heavens,
which were mapped out to correspond to the divisions of the earth. All the
gods, great and small, had their places assigned to them in the heavens,
and facts, including such as fell within the domain of political history,
were interpreted in terms of astral theology. So completely did this system
in the course of time sway men's minds that the cult, from being an
expression of animistic beliefs, took on the colour derived from the
"astral" interpretation of occurrences and doctrines. It left its trace in
incantations, omens and hymns, and it gave birth to astronomy, which was
assiduously cultivated because a knowledge of the heavens was the very
foundation of the system of belief unfolded by the priests of Babylonia and
Assyria. "Chaldaean wisdom" became in the classical world the synonym of
this science, which in its character was so essentially religious. The
persistent prominence which astrology (_q.v._) continued to enjoy down to
the border line of the scientific movement of our own days, and which is
directly traceable to the divination methods perfected in the Euphrates
valley, is a tribute to the scope and influence attained by the astral
theology of the Babylonian and Assyrian priests.

As an illustration of the manner in which the doctrines of the religion
were made to conform to the all-pervading astral theory, it will be
sufficient to refer to the modification undergone in this process of the
view developed in a very early period which apportioned the control of the
universe among the three gods Anu, Bel and Ea. Disassociating these gods
from all local connexions, Anu became the power presiding over the heavens,
to Bel was assigned the earth and the atmosphere immediately above it,
while Ea ruled over the deep. With the transfer of all the gods to the
heavens, and under the influence of the doctrine of the correspondence
between the heavens and the earth, Anu, Bel and Ea became the three "ways"
(as they are called) on the heavens. The "ways" appear in this instance to
have been the designation of the ecliptic circle, which was divided into
three sections or zones--a northern, a middle and a southern zone, Anu
being assigned to the first, Bel to the second, and Ea to the third zone.
The astral theology of the Babylonian-Assyrian religion, while thus bearing
the ear-marks of a system devised by the priests, succeeded in assimilating
the beliefs which represented the earlier attempts to systematize the more
popular aspects of the religion, and in this way a unification of diverse
elements was secured that led to interpreting the contents and the form of
the religion in terms of the astral-theological system.

The most noteworthy outcome of this system in the realm of religious
practice was, as already intimated, the growth of an elaborate and
complicated method of divining the future by the observation of the
phenomena in the heavens. It is significant that in the royal collection of
cuneiform literature made by King Assur-bani-pal of Assyria (668-626 B.C.)
and deposited in his palace at Nineveh, the omen collections connected with
the astral theology of Babylonia and Assyria form the largest class. There
are also indications that the extensive texts dealing with divination
through the liver of sacrificial animals, which represents a more popular
origin than divination through the observations of the heavens, based as it
is on the primitive view which regarded the liver as the seat of life and
of the soul, were brought into connexion with astral divination. Less
influenced by the astral-theological system are the old incantation texts
which were gathered together into series. In these series we can trace the
attempt to gather the incantation formulae and prayers produced in
different centres, and to make them conform to the tendency to centralize
the cult in the worship of Marduk and his consort in the south, and of
Assur and Ishtar in the north. Incantations originally addressed to Ea of
Eridu, as the god of the watery element, and to Nusku, as the god of fire,
were transferred to Marduk. This was done by making Ea confer on Marduk as
his son the powers of the father, and by making Nusku a messenger between
Ea and Marduk. At the same time, since the invoking of the divine powers
was the essential element in the incantations, in order to make the magic
formulae as effective as possible, a large number of the old local deities
are introduced to add their power to the chief ones; and it is here that
the astral system comes into play through the introduction of names of
stars, as well as through assigning attributes to the gods which clearly
reflect the conception that they have their seats in the heavens. The
incantations pass over naturally into hymns and prayers. The connexion
between the two is illustrated by the application of the term _shiptu_,
"incantation," to the direct appeals to the gods, as well as by the
introduction, on the one hand, of genuine prayers into the incantations and
by the addition, on the other hand, of incantations to prayers and hymns,
pure and simple. In another division of the religious literature of
Babylonia which is largely represented in Assur-bani-pal's collection--the
myths and legends--tales which originally symbolized the change of seasons,
or in which historical occurrences are overcast with more or less copious
[v.03 p.0115] admixture of legend and myth, were transferred to the
heavens, and so it happens that creation myths, and the accounts of
wanderings and adventures of heroes of the past, are referred to movements
among the planets and stars as well as to occurrences or supposed
occurrences on earth.

The ritual alone which accompanied divination practices and incantation
formulae and was a chief factor in the celebration of festival days and of
days set aside for one reason or the other to the worship of some god or
goddess or group of deities, is free from traces of the astral theology.
The more or less elaborate ceremonies prescribed for the occasions when the
gods were approached are directly connected with the popular elements of
the religion. Animal sacrifice, libations, ritualistic purification,
sprinkling of water, and symbolical rites of all kinds accompanied by short
prayers, represent a religious practice which in the Babylonian-Assyrian
religion, as in all religions, is older than any theology and survives the
changes which the theoretical substratum of the religion undergoes.

On the ethical side, the religion of Babylonia more particularly, and to a
less extent that of Assyria, advances to noticeable conceptions of the
qualities associated with the gods and goddesses and of the duties imposed
on man. Shamash the sun-god was invested with justice as his chief trait,
Marduk is portrayed as full of mercy and kindness, Ea is the protector of
mankind who is grieved when, through a deception practised upon Adapa,
humanity is deprived of immortality. The gods, to be sure, are easily
aroused to anger, and in some of them the dire aspects predominated, but
the view becomes more and more pronounced that there is some cause always
for the divine wrath. Though, in accounting for the anger of the gods, no
sharp distinction is made between moral offences and a ritualistic
oversight or neglect, yet the stress laid in the hymns and prayers, as well
as in the elaborate atonement ritual prescribed in order to appease the
anger of the gods, on the need of being clean and pure in the sight of the
higher powers, the inculcation of a proper aspect of humility, and above
all the need of confessing one's guilt and sins without any reserve--all
this bears testimony to the strength which the ethical factor acquired in
the domain of the religion.

This factor appears to less advantage in the unfolding of the views
concerning life after death. Throughout all periods of Babylonian-Assyrian
history, the conception prevailed of a large dark cavern below the earth,
not far from the Apsu--the ocean encircling and flowing underneath the
earth--in which all the dead were gathered and where they led a miserable
existence of inactivity amid gloom and dust. Occasionally a favoured
individual was permitted to escape from this general fate and placed in a
pleasant island. It would appear also that the rulers were always singled
out for divine grace, and in the earlier periods of the history, owing to
the prevailing view that the rulers stood nearer to the gods than other
mortals, the kings were deified after death, and in some instances divine
honours were paid to them even during their lifetime.

The influence exerted by the Babylonian-Assyrian religion was particularly
profound on the Semites, while the astral theology affected the ancient
world in general, including the Greeks and Romans. The impetus to the
purification of the old Semite religion to which the Hebrews for a long
time clung in common with their fellows--the various branches of nomadic
Arabs--was largely furnished by the remarkable civilization unfolded in the
Euphrates valley and in many of the traditions, myths and legends embodied
in the Old Testament; traces of direct borrowing from Babylonia may be
discerned, while the indirect influences in the domain of the prophetical
books, as also in the Psalms and in the so-called "Wisdom Literature," are
even more noteworthy. Even when we reach the New Testament period, we have
not passed entirely beyond the sphere of Babylonian-Assyrian influences. In
such a movement as early Christian gnosticism, Babylonian
elements--modified, to be sure, and transformed--are largely present, while
the growth of an apocalyptic literature is ascribed with apparent justice
by many scholars to the recrudescence of views the ultimate source of which
is to be found in the astral-theology of the Babylonian and Assyrian
priests.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Morris Jastrow, jun., _Religion Babyloniens und Assyriens_
(Giessen, 1904), enlarged and re-written form of the author's smaller
_Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_ (Boston, 1898); A. H. Sayce, _The
Religion of the Ancient Babylonians_ (Hibbert Lectures, London, 1887), now
superseded by the same author's _Religions of Ancient Egypt and Babylonia_
(Gifford Lectures, Edinburgh, 1902); Friedrich Jeremias, _Die Babylonier
und Assyrer_, in de la Saussaye's _Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte_ (3rd
ed., Tübingen, 1905), vol. i.; L. W. King, _Babylonian Religion and
Mythology_ (London, 1899); T. G. Pinches, _Religion of Babylonia and
Assyria_ (London, 1906). Of special texts and monographs bearing on the
religion may be mentioned various volumes in the new series of cuneiform
texts from Babylonian tablets, &c., in the British Museum (London, 1901- ),
especially parts v., xii., xv., xvii., xviii., xx. and xxi. and vol. iv. of
the earlier series of _Selections from the Miscellaneous Inscriptions of
Western Asia_, ed. by H. C. Rawlinson (2nd ed., London, 1891); H. Zimmern,
_Beiträge zur Kenntniss der babylonischen Religion_ (Leipzig, 1901); J. A.
Craig, _Assyrian and Babylonian Religious Texts_ (Leipzig, 1895-1897);
L. W. King, _The Seven Tablets of Creation_ (London, 1902); R. C. Thompson,
_The Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers of Nineveh and Babylon_
(London, 1900); A. Boissier, _Documents assyriens relatifs aux présages_
(Paris, 1894-1897); and his _Choix de textes relatifs à la divination
assyro-babylonienne_ (Geneva, 1905-1906); Ch. Fossey, _La Magie assyrienne_
(Paris, 1902); G. A. Reisner, _Sumerisch-babylonische Hymnen_ (Berlin,
1896); L. W. King, _Babylonian Magic and Sorcery_ (London, 1896); R. C.
Thompson, _Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia_ (London, 1903-1904); K. L.
Tallqvist, _Die assyrische Beschwörungsserie Maql[=u]_ (Leipzig, 1895);
J. A. Knudtzon, _Assyrische Gebete an den Sonnengott_ (Leipzig, 1893);
Virolleaud, _L'Astrologie chaldéenne_ (Paris, 1906- ); Craig,
_Astrological-Astronomical Texts_ (Leipzig, 1892); Martin, _Textes
religieux assyriens et babyloniens_ (Paris, 1900 and 1903); Paul Haupt,
_Das babylonische Nimrodepos_ (Leipzig, 1891); Friedrich Delitzsch, _Das
babylonische Weltschöpfungsepos_ (Leipzig, 1896); P. Jensen,
"Assyrisch-babylonische Mythen und Epen," in Schrader's _Keilinschriftliche
Bibliothek_, vol. vi. part 1 (Berlin, 1900); also his _Das Nationalepos der
Babylonier_, &c. (Strassburg, 1906); H. Zimmern in vol. ii. of 3rd ed. of
Schrader's _Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament_ (Berlin, 1903); Alfred
Jeremias, _Die babylonisch-assyrischen Vorstellungen von Leben nach dem
Tode_ (Leipzig, 1887); and his _Das Alte Testament im Lichte des Alten
Orients_ (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1906-1907); and _Babylonisches im Neuen
Testament_ (Leipzig, 1905). On the religious literature of Babylonia and
Assyria, see also chapters xv. to xxiv. in Jastrow's work (German and
English edition), Carl Bezold's _Ninive and Babylon_ (Bielefeld, 1905),
chapters vi. to xii., and the same author's monumental catalogue of the
cuneiform tablets in the Kuyunjik collection of the British Museum (5
vols., London, 1889-1899).

(M. JA.)

BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY, the name generally given to the deportation of the
Jews to Babylon by Nebuchadrezzar. Three separate occasions are mentioned
(Jer. lii. 28-30). The first was in the time of Jehoiachin in 597 B.C.,
when the temple of Jerusalem was partially despoiled and a number of the
leading citizens removed. After eleven years (in the reign of Zedekiah) a
fresh rising of the Judaeans occurred; the city was razed to the ground,
and a further deportation ensued. Finally, five years later, Jeremiah
(_loc. cit._) records a third captivity. After the overthrow of Babylonia
by the Persians, Cyrus gave the Jews permission to return to their native
land (537 B.C.), and more then forty thousand are said to have availed
themselves of the privilege. (See JEHOIAKIM; JEHOIACHIN; ZEDEKIAH;
EZRA-NEHEMIAH and JEWS: _History_.)

BABYLONIAN LAW. The material for the study of Babylonian law is singularly
extensive without being exhaustive. The so-called "contracts," including a
great variety of deeds, conveyances, bonds, receipts, accounts and, most
important of all, the actual legal decisions given by the judges in the law
courts, exist in thousands. Historical inscriptions, royal charters and
rescripts, despatches, private letters and the general literature afford
welcome supplementary information. Even grammatical and lexicographical
works, intended solely to facilitate the study of ancient literature,
contain many extracts or short sentences bearing on law and custom. The
so-called "Sumerian Family Laws" are thus preserved. The discovery of the
now celebrated Code of Khammurabi (Hammurabi)[1] (hereinafter simply termed
[v.03 p.0116] "the Code") has, however, made a more systematic study
possible than could have resulted from the classification and
interpretation of the other material. Some fragments of a later code exist
and have been published; but there still remain many points upon which we
have no evidence.

This material dates from the earliest times down to the commencement of our
era. The evidence upon a particular point may be very full at one period
and almost entirely lacking at another. The Code forms the backbone of the
skeleton sketch which is here reconstructed. The fragments of it which have
been recovered from Assur-bani-pal's library at Nineveh and later
Babylonian copies show that it was studied, divided into chapters entitled
_Ninu ilu [s.]irum_ from its opening words, and recopied for fifteen
hundred years or more. The greater part of it remained in force, even
through the Persian, Greek and Parthian conquests, which affected private
life in Babylonia very little, and it survived to influence Syro-Roman and
later Mahommedan law in Mesopotamia. The law and custom which preceded the
Code we shall call "early," that of the New Babylonian empire (as well as
the Persian, Greek, &c.) "late." The law in Assyria was derived from
Babylonia but conserved early features long after they had disappeared
elsewhere.

When the Semitic tribes settled in the cities of Babylonia, their tribal
custom passed over into city law. The early history of the country is the
story of a struggle for supremacy between the cities. A metropolis demanded
tribute and military support from its subject cities but left their local
cults and customs unaffected. The city rights and usages were respected by
kings and conquerors alike.

As late as the accession of Assur-bani-pal and Samas-sum-yukin we find the
Babylonians appealing to their city laws that groups of aliens to the
number of twenty at a time were free to enter the city, that foreign women
once married to Babylonian husbands could not be enslaved and that not even
a dog that entered the city could be put to death untried.

The population of Babylonia was of many races from early times and
intercommunication between the cities was incessant. Every city had a large
number of resident aliens. This freedom of intercourse must have tended to
assimilate custom. It was, however, reserved for the genius of Khammurabi
to make Babylon his metropolis and weld together his vast empire by a
uniform system of law.

[Sidenote: Code of Khammurabi.]

Almost all trace of tribal custom has already disappeared from the law of
the Code. It is state-law; alike self-help, blood-feud, marriage by
capture, are absent; though family solidarity, district responsibility,
ordeal, the _lex talionis_, are primitive features that remain. The king is
a benevolent autocrat, easily accessible to all his subjects, both able and
willing to protect the weak against the highest-placed oppressor. The royal
power, however, can only pardon when private resentment is appeased. The
judges are strictly supervised and appeal is allowed. The whole land is
covered with feudal holdings, masters of the levy, police, &c. There is a
regular postal system. The _pax Babylonica_ is so assured that private
individuals do not hesitate to ride in their carriage from Babylon to the
coast of the Mediterranean. The position of women is free and dignified.

The Code did not merely embody contemporary custom or conserve ancient law.
It is true that centuries of law-abiding and litigious habitude had
accumulated in the temple archives of each city vast stores of precedent in
ancient deeds and the records of judicial decisions, and that intercourse
had assimilated city custom. The universal habit of writing and perpetual
recourse to written contract even more modified primitive custom and
ancient precedent. Provided the parties could agree, the Code left them
free to contract as a rule. Their deed of agreement was drawn up in the
temple by a notary public, and confirmed by an oath "by god and the king."
It was publicly sealed and witnessed by professional witnesses, as well as
by collaterally interested parties. The manner in which it was thus
executed may have been sufficient security that its stipulations were not
impious or illegal. Custom or public opinion doubtless secured that the
parties would not agree to wrong. In case of dispute the judges dealt first
with the contract. They might not sustain it, but if the parties did not
dispute it, they were free to observe it. The judges' decision might,
however, be appealed against. Many contracts contain the proviso that in
case of future dispute the parties would abide by "the decision of the
king." The Code made known, in a vast number of cases, what that decision
would be, and many cases of appeal to the king were sent back to the judges
with orders to decide in accordance with it. The Code itself was carefully
and logically arranged and the order of its sections was conditioned by
their subject-matter. Nevertheless the order is not that of modern
scientific treatises, and a somewhat different order from both is most
convenient for our purpose.

The Code contemplates the whole population as falling into three classes,
the _amelu_, the _muskinu_ and the _ardu_. The _amelu_ was a patrician, the
man of family, whose birth, marriage and death were registered, of
ancestral estates and full civil rights. He had aristocratic privileges and
responsibilities, the right to exact retaliation for corporal injuries, and
liability to heavier punishment for crimes and misdemeanours, higher fees
and fines to pay. To this class belonged the king and court, the higher
officials, the professions and craftsmen. The term became in time a mere
courtesy title but originally carried with it standing. Already in the
Code, when status is not concerned, it is used to denote "any one." There
was no property qualification nor does the term appear to be racial. It is
most difficult to characterize the _muskinu_ exactly. The term came in time
to mean "a beggar" and with that meaning has passed through Aramaic and
Hebrew into many modern languages; but though the Code does not regard him
as necessarily poor, he may have been landless. He was free, but had to
accept monetary compensation for corporal injuries, paid smaller fees and
fines, even paid less offerings to the gods. He inhabited a separate
quarter of the city. There is no reason to regard him as specially
connected with the court, as a royal pensioner, nor as forming the bulk of
the population. The rarity of any reference to him in contemporary
documents makes further specification conjectural. The _ardu_ was a slave,
his master's chattel, and formed a very numerous class. He could acquire
property and even hold other slaves. His master clothed and fed him, paid
his doctor's fees, but took all compensation paid for injury done to him.
His master usually found him a slave-girl as wife (the children were then
born slaves), often set him up in a house (with farm or business) and
simply took an annual rent of him. Otherwise he might marry a freewoman
(the children were then free), who might bring him a dower which his master
could not touch, and at his death one-half of his property passed to his
master as his heir. He could acquire his freedom by purchase from his
master, or might be freed and dedicated to a temple, or even adopted, when
he became an _amelu_ and not a _muskinu_. Slaves were recruited by purchase
abroad, from captives taken in war and by freemen degraded for debt or
crime. A slave often ran away; if caught, the captor was bound to restore
him to his master, and the Code fixes a reward of two shekels which the
owner must pay the captor. It was about one-tenth of the average value. To
detain, harbour, &c., a slave was punished by death. So was an attempt to
get him to leave the city. A slave bore an identification mark, which could
only be removed by a surgical operation and which later consisted of his
owner's name tattoed or branded on the arm. On the great estates in Assyria
and its subject provinces were many serfs, mostly of subject race, settled
captives, or quondam slaves, tied to the soil they cultivated and sold with
the estate but capable of possessing land and property of their own. There
is little trace of serfs in Babylonia, unless the _muskinu_ be really a
serf.

The god of a city was originally owner of its land, which encircled it with
an inner ring of irrigable arable land and an outer fringe of pasture, and
the citizens were his tenants. The god and his viceregent, the king, had
long ceased to disturb tenancy, and were content with fixed dues in
_naturalia_, stock, [v.03 p.0117] money or service. One of the earliest
monuments records the purchase by a king of a large estate for his son,
paying a fair market price and adding a handsome honorarium to the many
owners in costly garments, plate, and precious articles of furniture. The
Code recognizes complete private ownership in land, but apparently extends
the right to hold land to votaries, merchants (and resident aliens?). But
all land was sold subject to its fixed charges. The king, however, could
free land from these charges by charter, which was a frequent way of
rewarding those who deserved well of the state. It is from these charters
that we learn nearly all we know of the obligations that lay upon land. The
state demanded men for the army and the corvée as well as dues in kind. A
definite area was bound to find a bowman together with his linked pikeman
(who bore the shield for both) and to furnish them with supplies for the
campaign. This area was termed "a bow" as early as the 8th century B.C.,
but the usage was much earlier. Later, a horseman was due from certain
areas. A man was only bound to serve so many (six?) times, but the land had
to find a man annually. The service was usually discharged by slaves and
serfs, but the _amelu_ (and perhaps the _muskinu_) went to war. The "bows"
were grouped in tens and hundreds. The corvée was less regular. The letters
of Khammurabi often deal with claims to exemption. Religious officials and
shepherds in charge of flocks were exempt. Special liabilities lay upon
riparian owners to repair canals, bridges, quays, &c. The state claimed
certain proportions of all crops, stock, &c. The king's messengers could
commandeer any subject's property, giving a receipt. Further, every city
had its own octroi duties, customs, ferry dues, highway and water rates.
The king had long ceased to be, if he ever was, owner of the land. He had
his own royal estates, his private property and dues from all his subjects.
The higher officials had endowments and official residences. The Code
regulates the feudal position of certain classes. They held an estate from
the king consisting of house, garden, field, stock and a salary, on
condition of personal service on the king's errand. They could not delegate
the service on pain of death. When ordered abroad they could nominate a
son, if capable, to hold the benefice and carry on the duty. If there was
no son capable, the state put in a _locum tenens_, but granted one-third to
the wife to maintain herself and children. The benefice was inalienable,
could not be sold, pledged, exchanged, sublet, devised or diminished. Other
land was held of the state for rent. Ancestral estate was strictly tied to
the family. If a holder would sell, the family had the right of redemption
and there seems to have been no time-limit to its exercise.

The temple occupied a most important position. It received from its
estates, from tithes and other fixed dues, as well as from the sacrifices
(a customary share) and other offerings of the faithful, vast amounts of
all sorts of _naturalia_; besides money and permanent gifts. The larger
temples had many officials and servants. Originally, perhaps, each town
clustered round one temple, and each head of a family had a right to
minister there and share its receipts. As the city grew, the right to so
many days a year at one or other shrine (or its "gate") descended in
certain families and became a species of property which could be pledged,
rented or shared within the family, but not alienated. In spite of all
these demands, however, the temples became great granaries and
store-houses; as they also were the city archives. The temple had its
responsibilities. If a citizen was captured by the enemy and could not
ransom himself the temple of his city must do so. To the temple came the
poor farmer to borrow seed corn or supplies for harvesters, &c.--advances
which he repaid without interest. The king's power over the temple was not
proprietary but administrative. He might borrow from it but repaid like
other borrowers. The tithe seems to have been the composition for the rent
due to the god for his land. It is not clear that all lands paid tithe,
perhaps only such as once had a special connexion with the temple.

The Code deals with a class of persons devoted to the service of a god, as
vestals or hierodules. The vestals were vowed to chastity, lived together
in a great nunnery, were forbidden to open or enter a tavern, and together
with other votaries had many privileges.

The Code recognizes many ways of disposing of property--sale, lease,
barter, gift, dedication, deposit, loan, pledge, all of which were matters
of contract. Sale was the delivery of the purchase (in the case of real
estate symbolized by a staff, a key, or deed of conveyance) in return for
the purchase money, receipts being given for both. Credit, if given, was
treated as a debt, and secured as a loan by the seller to be repaid by the
buyer, for which he gave a bond. The Code admits no claim unsubstantiated
by documents or the oath of witnesses. A buyer had to convince himself of
the seller's title. If he bought (or received on deposit) from a minor or a
slave without power of attorney, he would be executed as a thief. If the
goods were stolen and the rightful owner reclaimed them, he had to prove
his purchase by producing the seller and the deed of sale or witnesses to
it. Otherwise he would be adjudged a thief and die. If he proved his
purchase, he had to give up the property but had his remedy against the
seller or, if he had died, could reclaim five-fold from his estate. A man
who bought a slave abroad, might find that he had been stolen or captured
from Babylonia, and he had to restore him to his former owner without
profit. If he bought property belonging to a feudal holding, or to a ward
in chancery, he had to return it and forfeit what he gave for it as well.
He could repudiate the purchase of a slave attacked by the _bennu_ sickness
within the month (later, a hundred days), and had a female slave three days
on approval. A defect of title or undisclosed liability would invalidate
the sale at any time.

Landowners frequently cultivated their land themselves but might employ a
husbandman or let it. The husbandman was bound to carry out the proper
cultivation, raise an average crop and leave the field in good tilth. In
case the crop failed the Code fixed a statutory return. Land might be let
at a fixed rent when the Code enacted that accidental loss fell on the
tenant. If let on share-profit, the landlord and tenant shared the loss
proportionately to their stipulated share of profit. If the tenant paid his
rent and left the land in good tilth, the landlord could not interfere nor
forbid subletting. Waste land was let to reclaim, the tenant being rent
free for three years and paying a stipulated rent in the fourth year. If
the tenant neglected to reclaim the land the Code enacted that he must hand
it over in good faith and fixed a statutory rent. Gardens or plantations
were let in the same ways and under the same conditions; but for
date-groves four years' free tenure was allowed. The metayer system was in
vogue, especially on temple lands. The landlord found land, labour, oxen
for ploughing and working the watering-machines, carting, threshing or
other implements, seed corn, rations for the workmen and fodder for the
cattle. The tenant, or steward, usually had other land of his own. If he
stole the seed, rations or fodder, the Code enacted that his fingers should
be cut off. If he appropriated or sold the implements, impoverished or
sublet the cattle, he was heavily fined and in default of payment might be
condemned to be torn to pieces by the cattle on the field. Rent was as
contracted.

Irrigation was indispensable. If the irrigator neglected to repair his
dyke, or left his runnel open and caused a flood, he had to make good the
damage done to his neighbours' crops, or be sold with his family to pay the
cost. The theft of a watering-machine, water-bucket or other agricultural
implement was heavily fined.

Houses were let usually for the year, but also for longer terms, rent being
paid in advance, half-yearly. The contract generally specified that the
house was in good repair, and the tenant was bound to keep it so. The
woodwork, including doors and door frames, was removable, and the tenant
might bring and take away his own. The Code enacted that if the landlord
would re-enter before the term was up, he must remit a fair proportion of
the rent. Land was leased for houses or other buildings to be built upon
it, the tenant being rent-free for eight or ten years; after which the
building came into the landlord's possession.

Despite the multitude of slaves, hired labour was often needed, especially
at harvest. This was matter of contract, and the hirer, [v.03 p.0118] who
usually paid in advance, might demand a guarantee to fulfil the engagement.
Cattle were hired for ploughing, working the watering-machines, carting,
threshing, etc. The Code fixed a statutory wage for sowers, ox-drivers,
field-labourers, and hire for oxen, asses, &c.

There were many herds and flocks. The flocks were committed to a shepherd
who gave receipt for them and took them out to pasture. The Code fixed him
a wage. He was responsible for all care, must restore ox for ox, sheep for
sheep, must breed them satisfactorily. Any dishonest use of the flock had
to be repaid ten-fold, but loss by disease or wild beasts fell on the
owner. The shepherd made good all loss due to his neglect. If he let the
flock feed on a field of corn he had to pay damages four-fold; if he turned
them into standing corn when they ought to have been folded he paid
twelve-fold.

In commercial matters, payment in kind was still common, though the
contracts usually stipulate for cash, naming the standard expected, that of
Babylon, Larsa, Assyria, Carchemish, &c. The Code enacted, however, that a
debtor must be allowed to pay in produce according to statutory scale. If a
debtor had neither money nor crop, the creditor must not refuse goods.

Debt was secured on the person of the debtor. Distraint on a debtor's corn
was forbidden by the Code; not only must the creditor give it back, but his
illegal action forfeited his claim altogether. An unwarranted seizure for
debt was fined, as was the distraint of a working ox. The debtor being
seized for debt could nominate as mancipium or hostage to work off the
debt, his wife, a child, or slave. The creditor could only hold a wife or
child three years as mancipium. If the mancipium died a natural death while
in the creditor's possession no claim could lie against the latter; but if
he was the cause of death by cruelty, he had to give son for son, or pay
for a slave. He could sell a slave-hostage, unless she were a slave-girl
who had borne her master children. She had to be redeemed by her owner.

The debtor could also pledge his property, and in contracts often pledged a
field, house or crop. The Code enacted, however, that the debtor should
always take the crop himself and pay the creditor from it. If the crop
failed, payment was deferred and no interest could be charged for that
year. If the debtor did not cultivate the field himself he had to pay for
the cultivation, but if the cultivation was already finished he must
harvest it himself and pay his debt from the crop. If the cultivator did
not get a crop this would not cancel his contract. Pledges were often made
where the intrinsic value of the article was equivalent to the amount of
the debt; but antichretic pledge was more common, where the profit of the
pledge was a set-off against the interest of the debt. The whole property
of the debtor might be pledged as security for the payment of the debt,
without any of it coming into the enjoyment of the creditor. Personal
guarantees were often given that the debtor would repay or the guarantor
become liable himself.

Trade was very extensive. A common way of doing business was for a merchant
to entrust goods or money to a travelling agent, who sought a market for
his goods. The caravans travelled far beyond the limits of the empire. The
Code insisted that the agent should inventory and give a receipt for all
that he received. No claim could be made for anything not so entered. Even
if the agent made no profit he was bound to return double what he had
received, if he made poor profit he had to make up the deficiency; but he
was not responsible for loss by robbery or extortion on his travels. On his
return, the principal must give a receipt for what was handed over to him.
Any false entry or claim on the agent's part was penalised three-fold, on
the principal's part six-fold. In normal cases profits were divided
according to contract, usually equally.

A considerable amount of forwarding was done by the caravans. The carrier
gave a receipt for the consignment, took all responsibility and exacted a
receipt on delivery. If he defaulted he paid five-fold. He was usually paid
in advance. Deposit, especially warehousing of grain, was charged for at
one-sixtieth. The warehouseman took all risks, paid double for all
shortage, but no claim could be made unless he had given a properly
witnessed receipt. Water traffic on the Euphrates and canals was early very
considerable. Ships, whose tonnage was estimated at the amount of grain
they could carry, were continually hired for the transport of all kinds of
goods. The Code fixes the price for building and insists on the builder's
giving a year's guarantee of seaworthiness. It fixes the hire of ship and
of crew. The captain was responsible for the freight and the ship; he had
to replace all loss. Even if he refloated the ship he had to pay a fine of
half its value for sinking it. In the case of collision the boat under way
was responsible for damages to the boat at anchor. The Code also regulated
the liquor traffic, fixing a fair price for beer and forbidding the
connivance of the tavern-keeper (a female!) at disorderly conduct or
treasonable assembly, under pain of death. She was to hale the offenders to
the palace, which implied an efficient and accessible police system.

Payment through a banker or by written draft against deposit was frequent.
Bonds to pay were treated as negotiable. Interest was rarely charged on
advances by the temple or wealthy landowners for pressing needs, but this
may have been part of the metayer system. The borrowers may have been
tenants. Interest was charged at very high rates for overdue loans of this
kind. Merchants (and even temples in some cases) made ordinary business
loans, charging from 20 to 30%.

Marriage retained the form of purchase, but was essentially a contract to
be man and wife together. The marriage of young people was usually arranged
between the relatives, the bridegroom's father providing the bride-price,
which with other presents the suitor ceremonially presented to the bride's
father. This bride-price was usually handed over by her father to the bride
on her marriage, and so came back into the bridegroom's possession, along
with her dowry, which was her portion as a daughter. The bride-price varied
much, according to the position of the parties, but was in excess of that
paid for a slave. The Code enacted that if the father does not, after
accepting a man's presents, give him his daughter, he must return the
presents doubled. Even if his decision was brought about by libel on the
part of the suitor's friend this was done, and the Code enacted that the
faithless friend should not marry the girl. If a suitor changed his mind,
he forfeited the presents. The dowry might include real estate, but
generally consisted of personal effects and household furniture. It
remained the wife's for life, descending to her children, if any; otherwise
returning to her family, when the husband could deduct the bride-price if
it had not been given to her, or return it, if it had. The marriage
ceremony included joining of hands and the utterance of some formula of
acceptance on the part of the bridegroom, as "I am the son of nobles,
silver and gold shall fill thy lap, thou shall be my wife, I will be thy
husband. Like the fruit of a garden I will give thee offspring." It must be
performed by a freeman.

The marriage contract, without which the Code ruled that the woman was no
wife, usually stated the consequences to which each party was liable for
repudiating the other. These by no means necessarily agree with the Code.
Many conditions might be inserted: as that the wife should act as
maidservant to her mother-in-law, or to a first wife. The married couple
formed a unit as to external responsibility, especially for debt. The man
was responsible for debts contracted by his wife, even before her marriage,
as well as for his own; but he could use her as a mancipium. Hence the Code
allowed a proviso to be inserted in the marriage contract, that the wife
should not be seized for her husband's pre-nuptial debts; but enacted that
then he was not responsible for her pre-nuptial debts, and, in any case,
that both together were responsible for all debts contracted after
marriage. A man might make his wife a settlement by deed of gift, which
gave her a life interest in part of his property, and he might reserve to
her the right to bequeath it to a favourite child, but she could in no case
leave it to her family. Although married she always remained a member of
her father's house--she is rarely named wife of A, usually daughter of B,
or mother of C.

Divorce was optional with the man, but he had to restore the dowry and, if
the wife had borne him children, she had the [v.03 p.0119] custody of them.
He had then to assign her the income of field, or garden, as well as goods,
to maintain herself and children until they grew up. She then shared
equally with them in the allowance (and apparently in his estate at his
death) and was free to marry again. If she had no children, he returned her
the dowry and paid her a sum equivalent to the bride-price, or a mina of
silver, if there had been none. The latter is the forfeit usually named in
the contract for his repudiation of her.

If she had been a bad wife, the Code allowed him to send her away, while he
kept the children and her dowry; or he could degrade her to the position of
a slave in his own house, where she would have food and clothing. She might
bring an action against him for cruelty and neglect and, if she proved her
case, obtain a judicial separation, taking with her her dowry. No other
punishment fell on the man. If she did not prove her case, but was proved
to be a bad wife, she was drowned. If she were left without maintenance
during her husband's involuntary absence, she could cohabit with another
man, but must return to her husband if he came back, the children of the
second union remaining with their own father. If she had maintenance, a
breach of the marriage tie was adultery. Wilful desertion by, or exile of,
the husband dissolved the marriage, and if he came back he had no claim on
her property; possibly not on his own.

As a widow, the wife took her husband's place in the family, living on in
his house and bringing up the children. She could only remarry with
judicial consent, when the judge was bound to inventory the deceased's
estate and hand it over to her and her new husband in trust for the
children. They could not alienate a single utensil. If she did not remarry,
she lived on in her husband's house and took a child's share on the
division of his estate, when the children had grown up. She still retained
her dowry and any settlement deeded to her by her husband. This property
came to her children. If she had remarried, all her children shared equally
in her dowry, but the first husband's gift fell to his children or to her
selection among them, if so empowered.

Monogamy was the rule, and a childless wife might give her husband a maid
(who was no wife) to bear him children, who were reckoned hers. She
remained mistress of her maid and might degrade her to slavery again for
insolence, but could not sell her if she had borne her husband children. If
the wife did this, the Code did not allow the husband to take a concubine.
If she would not, he could do so. The concubine was a wife, though not of
the same rank; the first wife had no power over her. A concubine was a free
woman, was often dowered for marriage and her children were legitimate. She
could only be divorced on the same conditions as a wife. If a wife became a
chronic invalid, the husband was bound to maintain her in the home they had
made together, unless she preferred to take her dowry and go back to her
father's house; but he was free to remarry. In all these cases the children
were legitimate and legal heirs.

There was, of course, no hindrance to a man having children by a slave
girl. These children were free, in any case, and their mother could not be
sold, though she might be pledged, and she was free on her master's death.
These children could be legitimized by their father's acknowledgment before
witnesses, and were often adopted. They then ranked equally in sharing
their father's estate, but if not adopted, the wife's children divided and
took first choice.

Vestal virgins were not supposed to have children, yet they could and often
did marry. The Code contemplated that such a wife would give a husband a
maid as above. Free women might marry slaves and be dowered for the
marriage. The children were free, and at the slave's death the wife took
her dowry and half what she and her husband had acquired in wedlock for
self and children; the master taking the other half as his slave's heir.

A father had control over his children till their marriage. He had a right
to their labour in return for their keep. He might hire them out and
receive their wages, pledge them for debt, even sell them outright. Mothers
had the same rights in the absence of the father; even elder brothers when
both parents were dead. A father had no claim on his married children for
support, but they retained a right to inherit on his death.

The daughter was not only in her father's power to be given in marriage,
but he might dedicate her to the service of some god as a vestal or a
hierodule; or give her as a concubine. She had no choice in these matters,
which were often decided in her childhood. A grown-up daughter might wish
to become a votary, perhaps in preference to an uncongenial marriage, and
it seems that her father could not refuse her wish. In all these cases the
father might dower her. If he did not, on his death the brothers were bound
to do so, giving her a full child's share if a wife, a concubine or a
vestal, but one-third of a child's share if she were a hierodule or a
Marduk priestess. The latter had the privilege of exemption from state dues
and absolute disposal of her property. All other daughters had only a life
interest in their dowry, which reverted to their family, if childless, or
went to their children if they had any. A father might, however, execute a
deed granting a daughter power to leave her property to a favourite brother
or sister. A daughter's estate was usually managed for her by her brothers,
but if they did not satisfy her, she could appoint a steward. If she
married, her husband managed it.

The son also appears to have received his share on marriage, but did not
always then leave his father's house; he might bring his wife there. This
was usual in child marriages.

Adoption was very common, especially where the father (or mother) was
childless or had seen all his children grow up and marry away. The child
was then adopted to care for the parents' old age. This was done by
contract, which usually specified what the parent had to leave and what
maintenance was expected. The real children, if any, were usually
consenting parties to an arrangement which cut off their expectations. They
even, in some cases, found the estate for the adopted child who was to
relieve them of a care. If the adopted child failed to carry out the filial
duty the contract was annulled in the law courts. Slaves were often adopted
and if they proved unfilial were reduced to slavery again.

A craftsman often adopted a son to learn the craft. He profited by the
son's labour. If he failed to teach his son the craft, that son could
prosecute him and get the contract annulled. This was a form of
apprenticeship, and it is not clear that the apprentice had any filial
relation.

A man who adopted a son, and afterwards married and had a family of his
own, could dissolve the contract but must give the adopted child one-third
of a child's share in goods, but no real estate. That could only descend in
the family to which he had ceased to belong. Vestals frequently adopted
daughters, usually other vestals, to care for their old age.

Adoption had to be with consent of the real parents, who usually executed a
deed making over the child, who thus ceased to have any claim upon them.
But vestals, hierodules, certain palace officials and slaves had no rights
over their children and could raise no obstacle. Foundlings and
illegitimate children had no parents to object. If the adopted child
discovered his true parents and wanted to return to them, his eye or tongue
was torn out. An adopted child was a full heir, the contract might even
assign him the position of eldest son. Usually he was residuary legatee.

All legitimate children shared equally in the father's estate at his death,
reservation being made of a bride-price for an unmarried son, dower for a
daughter or property deeded to favourite children by the father. There was
no birthright attaching to the position of eldest son, but he usually acted
as executor and after considering what each had already received equalized
the shares. He even made grants in excess to the others from his own share.
When there were two mothers, the two families shared equally in the
father's estate until later times when the first family took two-thirds.
Daughters, in the absence of sons, had sons' rights. Children also shared
their own mother's property, but had no share in that of a stepmother.

A father could disinherit a son in early times without restriction, but the
Code insisted upon judicial consent and that only for repeated unfilial
conduct. In early times the son who denied his father had his front hair
shorn, a slave-mark put on him, and [v.03 p.0120] could be sold as a slave;
while if he denied his mother he had his front hair shorn, was driven round
the city as an example and expelled his home, but not degraded to slavery.

Adultery was punished with the death of both parties by drowning, but if
the husband was willing to pardon his wife, the king might intervene to
pardon the paramour. For incest with his own mother, both were burned to
death; with a stepmother, the man was disinherited; with a daughter, the
man was exiled; with a daughter-in-law, he was drowned; with a son's
betrothed, he was fined. A wife who for her lover's sake procured her
husband's death was gibbeted. A betrothed girl, seduced by her prospective
father-in-law, took her dowry and returned to her family, and was free to
marry as she chose.

In the criminal law the ruling principle was the _lex talionis_. Eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, limb for limb was the penalty for assault upon an
_amelu_. A sort of symbolic retaliation was the punishment of the offending
member, seen in the cutting off the hand that struck a father or stole a
trust; in cutting off the breast of a wet-nurse who substituted a
changeling for the child entrusted to her; in the loss of the tongue that
denied father or mother (in the Elamite contracts the same penalty was
inflicted for perjury); in the loss of the eye that pried into forbidden
secrets. The loss of the surgeon's hand that caused loss of life or limb;
or the brander's hand that obliterated a slave's identification mark, are
very similar. The slave, who struck a freeman or denied his master, lost an
ear, the organ of hearing and symbol of obedience. To bring another into
danger of death by false accusation was punished by death. To cause loss of
liberty or property by false witness was punished by the penalty the
perjurer sought to bring upon another.

The death penalty was freely awarded for theft and other crimes regarded as
coming under that head; for theft involving entrance of palace or temple
treasury, for illegal purchase from minor or slave, for selling stolen
goods or receiving the same, for common theft in the open (in default of
multiple restoration) or receiving the same, for false claim to goods, for
kidnapping, for assisting or harbouring fugitive slaves, for detaining or
appropriating same, for brigandage, for fraudulent sale of drink, for
disorderly conduct of tavern, for delegation of personal service, for
misappropriating the levy, for oppression of feudal holders, for causing
death of a householder by bad building. The manner of death is not
specified in these cases. This death penalty was also fixed for such
conduct as placed another in danger of death. A specified form of death
penalty occurs in the following cases: gibbeting (on the spot where crime
was committed) for burglary, later also for encroaching on the king's
highway, for getting a slave-brand obliterated, for procuring husband's
death; burning for incest with own mother, for vestal entering or opening
tavern, for theft at fire (on the spot); drowning for adultery, rape of
betrothed maiden, bigamy, bad conduct as wife, seduction of
daughter-in-law.

A curious extension of the _talio_ is the death of creditor's son for his
father's having caused the death of debtor's son as mancipium; of builder's
son for his father's causing the death of house-owner's son by building the
house badly; the death of a man's daughter because her father caused the
death of another man's daughter.

The contracts naturally do not concern such criminal cases as the above, as
a rule, but marriage contracts do specify death by strangling, drowning,
precipitation from a tower or pinnacle of the temple or by the iron sword
for a wife's repudiation of her husband. We are quite without evidence as
to the executive in all these cases.

Exile was inflicted for incest with a daughter; disinheritance for incest
with a stepmother or for repeated unfilial conduct. Sixty strokes of an
ox-hide scourge were awarded for a brutal assault on a superior, both being
_amelu_. Branding (perhaps the equivalent of degradation to slavery) was
the penalty for slander of a married woman or vestal. Deprivation of office
in perpetuity fell upon the corrupt judge. Enslavement befell the
extravagant wife and unfilial children. Imprisonment was common, but is not
recognized by the Code.

The commonest of all penalties was a fine. This is awarded by the Code for
corporal injuries to a _muskinu_ or slave (paid to his master); for damages
done to property, for breach of contract. The restoration of goods
appropriated, illegally bought, or damaged by neglect, was usually
accompanied by a fine, giving it the form of multiple restoration. This
might be double, treble, fourfold, fivefold, sixfold, tenfold, twelvefold,
even thirtyfold, according to the enormity of the offence.

The Code recognized the importance of intention. A man who killed another
in a quarrel must swear he did not do so intentionally, and was then only
fined according to the rank of the deceased. The Code does not say what
would be the penalty of murder, but death is so often awarded where death
is caused that we can hardly doubt that the murderer was put to death. If
the assault only led to injury and was unintentional, the assailant in a
quarrel had to pay the doctor's fees. A brander, induced to remove a
slave's identification mark, could swear to his ignorance and was free. The
owner of an ox which gored a man on the street was only responsible for
damages if the ox was known by him to be vicious, even if it caused death.
If the mancipium died a natural death under the creditor's hand, the
creditor was scot free. In ordinary cases responsibility was not demanded
for accident or for more than proper care. Poverty excused bigamy on the
part of a deserted wife.

On the other hand carelessness and neglect were severely punished, as in
the case of the unskilful physician, if it led to loss of life or limb his
hands were cut off, a slave had to be replaced, the loss of his eye paid
for to half his value; a veterinary surgeon who caused the death of an ox
or ass paid quarter value; a builder, whose careless workmanship caused
death, lost his life or paid for it by the death of his child, replaced
slave or goods, and in any case had to rebuild the house or make good any
damages due to defective building and repair the defect as well. The
boat-builder had to make good any defect of construction or damage due to
it for a year's warranty.

Throughout the Code respect is paid to status.

Suspicion was not enough. The criminal must be taken in the act, _e.g._ the
adulterer, ravisher, &c. A man could not be convicted of theft unless the
goods were found in his possession.

In the case of a lawsuit the plaintiff preferred his own plea. There is no
trace of professional advocates, but the plea had to be in writing and the
notary doubtless assisted in the drafting of it. The judge saw the plea,
called the other parties before him and sent for the witnesses. If these
were not at hand he might adjourn the case for their production, specifying
a time up to six months. Guarantees might be entered into to produce the
witnesses on a fixed day. The more important cases, especially those
involving life and death, were tried by a bench of judges. With the judges
were associated a body of elders, who shared in the decision, but whose
exact function is not yet clear. Agreements, declarations and
non-contentious cases are usually witnessed by one judge and twelve elders.

Parties and witnesses were put on oath. The penalty for false witness was
usually that which would have been awarded the convicted criminal. In
matters beyond the knowledge of men, as the guilt or innocence of an
alleged wizard or a suspected wife, the ordeal by water was used. The
accused jumped into the sacred river, and the innocent swam while the
guilty drowned. The accused could clear himself by oath where his own
knowledge was alone available. The plaintiff could swear to his loss by
brigands, as to goods claimed, the price paid for a slave purchased abroad
or the sum due to him. But great stress was laid on the production of
written evidence. It was a serious thing to lose a document. The judges
might be satisfied of its existence and terms by the evidence of the
witnesses to it, and then issue an order that whenever found it should be
given up. Contracts annulled were ordered to be broken. The court might go
a journey to view the property and even take with them the sacred symbols
on which oath was made.

The decision given was embodied in writing, sealed and witnessed by the
judges, the elders, witnesses and a scribe. Women might act in all these
capacities. The parties swore an [v.03 p.0121] oath, embodied in the
document, to observe its stipulations. Each took a copy and one was held by
the scribe to be stored in the archives.

Appeal to the king was allowed and is well attested. The judges at Babylon
seem to have formed a superior court to those of provincial towns, but a
defendant might elect to answer the charge before the local court and
refuse to plead at Babylon.

Finally, it may be noted that many immoral acts, such as the use of false
weights, lying, &c., which could not be brought into court, are severely
denounced in the Omen Tablets as likely to bring the offender into "the
hand of God" as opposed to "the hand of the king."

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Contracts in general: Oppert and Menant, _Documents
juridiques de l'Assyrie et de la Chaldée_ (Paris, 1877); J. Kohler and
F. E. Peiser, _Aus dem babylonischen Rechtsleben_ (Leipzig, 1890 ff.);
F. E. Peiser, _Babylonische Vertrage_ (Berlin, 1890), _Keilinschriftliche
Actenstücke_ (Berlin, 1889); Br. Meissner, _Beiträge zur altbabylonischen
Privatrecht_ (Leipzig, 1893); F. E. Peiser, "Texte juristischen und
geschäftlichen Inhalts," vol. iv. of Schrader's _Keilinschriftliche
Bibliothek_ (Berlin, 1896); C. H. W. Johns, _Assyrian Deeds and Documents
relating to the Transfer of Property_ (3 vols., Cambridge, 1898); H. Radau,
_Early Babylonian History_ (New York, 1900); C. H. W. Johns, _Babylonian
and Assyrian Laws, Contracts and Letters_ (Edinburgh, 1904). For editions
of texts and the innumerable articles in scientific journals see the
bibliographies and references in the above works. "The Code of Hammurabi,"
_Editio princeps_, by V. Scheil in tome iv. of the _Textes
Elamites-Semitiques_ of the _Mémoires de la délégation en Perse_ (Paris,
1902); H. Winckler, "Die Gesetze Hammurabis Königs von Babylon um 2250 v.
Chr." _Der alte Orient_, iv. Jahrgang, Heft 4; D. H. Müller, _Die Gesetze
Hammurabis_ (Vienna, 1903); J. Kohler and F. E. Peiser, _Hammurabis Gesetz_
(Leipzig, 1904); R. F. Harper, _The Code of Hammurabi, King of Babylon
about 2250 B.C._ (Chicago, 1904); S. A. Cook, _The Laws of Moses and the
Code of Hammurabi_ (London, 1903).

(C. H. W. J.)

[1] For the transliteration of Babylonian and Assyrian names generally, see
BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA, section ix., _Proper Names_.

BACAU, the capital of the department of Bacau, Rumania; situated among the
foothills of the Carpathian Mountains, and on the river Bistritza, which
enters the river Sereth 5 m. S. Pop. (1900) 16,187, including 7850 Jews.
Although of modern growth, Bacau is one of the chief commercial centres in
Moldavia, possessing many large timber yards. It is on the main railway
from Czernovitz, in Bukovina, to Galatz; and on two branch lines, one of
which enters Transylvania through the Ghimesh Pass, while both give access
to the salt mines, petroleum wells and forests of the Carpathians.

BACCARAT, a gambling card-game (origin of name unknown), supposed to have
been introduced into France from Italy during the reign of Charles VIII.
There are two accepted varieties of the game--_baccarat chemin de fer_
(railway) and _baccarat banque_ (or _à deux tableaux_). In _baccarat chemin
de fer_ six full packs of cards are used. These are shuffled by a croupier
and then by any of the players who wish to do so. From three to eleven
persons may play. Counters are generally used and are sold by the banker
who afterwards redeems them. The croupier takes a number of cards from the
top of the pack and passes them to the player on his right (sometimes left)
who becomes banker, a position which he holds until he loses, when the deal
passes to the player next in order. The other players are called _punters_.
The banker places before him the sum he wishes to stake and the punters do
likewise, unless a punter desires to _go bank_, signifying his intention by
saying, _Banco!_ In this case he plays against the entire stake of the
banker. After the stakes have been made the dealer deals a card to his
right for the punters, then one to himself, then a third to his left for
the punters and, finally, another to himself, all face downwards. Court
cards and tens count nothing; all others the number of their pips. Each
punter looks at his cards, and any one having 8 or 9 turns his card up and
announces it, the hand then being at an end. The player having the highest
stake plays for both punters, and if the card turned is better than that of
the banker, the latter pays each punter the amount of his stake. If not,
the banker wins all stakes and the game proceeds as before. If no
announcement is made, meaning that neither player holds 8 or 9, the banker
deals another card to the player on his right, who, if his first card is 6
or 7, will refuse it, fearing to overrun. The second card is turned face
upwards on the table. If his card is 5 he may, or may not, accept the
second card, according to his judgment. In case of his refusal the card is
offered to the second punter. If the first card is _baccarat_ (_i.e._
amounts to 0) or 1, 2, 3 or 4, a punter always accepts the second card. The
banker then decides whether he will draw another card himself or expose his
original ones, and when he has made his play pays or receives according as
he wins or loses. Ties neither win nor lose but go over to the next deal. A
player who has lost on _going bank_ may go bank again, but no player may go
bank more than twice in succession. In the variation _baccarat banque_ (or
_à deux tableaux_), three packs of cards are used and the banker is
permanent; the player who offers to risk the largest amount occupying the
position. A line is drawn across the table and any one wishing to do so may
place his stake _à cheval_, _i.e._ on the line. Stakes so placed neither
win nor lose if one side wins and the other loses, but win if both sides
win and are lost if both sides lose. The laws of baccarat are complicated
and no one code is accepted as authoritative, the different clubs making
their own rules.

See Badoureau, _Étude mathématique sur le jeu de baccarat_ (Paris, 1881);
L. Billard, _Bréviaire du baccara expérimental_ (Paris, 1883).

BACCHANALIA, the Lat. name for the wild and mystic festivals of Bacchus
(Dionysus). They were introduced into Rome from lower Italy by way of
Etruria, and held in secret, attended by women only, on three days in the
year in the grove of Simila (_Stimula_, _Semele_; Ovid, _Fasti_, vi. 503),
near the Aventine hill. Subsequently, admission to the rites were extended
to men and celebrations took place five times a month. The evil reputation
of these festivals, at which the grossest debaucheries took place, and all
kinds of crimes and political conspiracies were supposed to be planned, led
in 186 B.C. to a decree of the senate--the so-called _Senatus consultum de
Bacchanalibus_, inscribed on a bronze tablet discovered in Calabria (1640),
now at Vienna--by which the Bacchanalia were prohibited throughout the
whole of Italy, except in certain special cases, in which the senate
reserved the right of allowing them, subject to certain restrictions. But,
in spite of the severe punishment inflicted upon those who were found to be
implicated in the criminal practices disclosed by state investigation, the
Bacchanalia were not stamped out, at any rate in the south of Italy, for a
very long time (Livy xxxix. 8-19, 41; xl. 19).

BACCHYLIDES, Greek lyric poet, was born at Iulis, in the island of Ceos.
His father's name was probably Meidon; his mother was a sister of
Simonides, himself a native of Iulis. Eusebius says that Bacchylides
"flourished" ([Greek: êkmazen]) in Ol. 78. 2 (467 B.C.). As the term
[Greek: êkmazen] refers to the physical prime, and was commonly placed at
about the fortieth year, we may suppose that Bacchylides was born _circa_
507 B.C. Among his Odes the earliest that can be approximately dated is
xii.,[1] which may belong to 481 or 479 B.C.; the latest is vi., of which
the date is fixed by the recently found fragment of the Olympic register to
Ol. 82. 1 (452 B.C.). He would thus have been some forty-nine years younger
than his uncle Simonides, and some fifteen years younger than Pindar.
Elsewhere Eusebius states that Bacchylides "was of repute" ([Greek:
egnôrizeto]) in Ol. 87. 2 (431 B.C.); and Georgius Syncellus, using the
same word, gives Ol. 88 (428-425 B.C.). The phrase would mean that he was
then in the fulness of years and of fame. There is nothing improbable in
the supposition that he survived the beginning of the Peloponnesian war.

Bacchylides, like Simonides and Pindar, visited the court of Hiero I. of
Syracuse (478-467). In his fifth Ode (476 B.C.), the word [Greek: xenos]
(v. 11) has been taken to mean that he had already been the guest of the
prince; and, as Simonides went to Sicily in or about 477 B.C., that is not
unlikely. Ode iii. (468 B.C.) was possibly written at Syracuse, as verses
15 and 16 suggest. He there pays a high compliment to Hiero's taste in
poetry (ver. 3 ff.). A scholium on _Pyth._ ii. 90 (166) avers that Hiero
preferred the Odes of Bacchylides to those of Pindar. The Alexandrian
scholars interpreted a number of passages in Pindar as hostile allusions to
Bacchylides or Simonides. If the scholiasts [v.03 p.0122] are right, it
would appear that Pindar regarded the younger of the two Cean poets as a
jealous rival, who disparaged him to their common patron (schol. _Pyth._
ii. 52 f.), and as one whose poetical skill was due to study rather than to
genius (_Ol._ ii. 91-110). In _Olymp._ ii. 96 the dual [Greek: garueton],
if it does not refer to the uncle and nephew, remains mysterious; nor does
it admit of probable emendation.[2] One would gladly reject this tradition,
to which the scholia so frequently refer; yet it would be rash to assume
that it rested merely on surmise. The Alexandrians may have possessed
evidence on the subject which is now lost. It is tolerably certain that the
three poets were visitors at Hiero's court at about the same time: Pindar
and Bacchylides wrote odes of the same kind in his honour; and there was a
tradition that he preferred the younger poet. There is thus no intrinsic
improbability in the hypothesis that Pindar's haughty spirit had suffered,
or imagined, some mortification. It is noteworthy that, whereas in 476 and
470 both he and Bacchylides celebrated Hiero's victories, in 468 (the most
important occasion of all) Bacchylides alone was commissioned to do so;
although in that year Pindar composed an ode (_Olymp._ vi.) for another
Syracusan victor at the same festival. Nor is it difficult to conceive that
a despot such as Hiero, whose constitutional position was ill-defined, and
who was perhaps all the more exigent of deference on that account, may have
found the genial Ionian a more agreeable courtier than Pindar, an
aristocrat of the Boeoto-Aeolic type, not unmindful of "his fathers the
Aegidae," and rather prone to link the praises of his patron with a lofty
intimation of his own claims (see, _e.g._, _Olymp._ i. _ad fin._). But,
whatever may have been the true bearing of Pindar's occasional innuendoes,
it is at any rate pleasant to find that in the extant work of Bacchylides
there is not the faintest semblance of hostile allusion to any rival. Nay,
one might almost imagine a compliment to Pindar, when, in mentioning
Hesiod, he calls him [Greek: Boiôtos anêr].

Plutarch (_de Exilio_, p. 605 c) names Bacchylides in a list of writers,
who after they had been banished from their native cities, were active and
successful in literature. It was Peloponnesus that afforded a new home to
the exiled poet. The passage gives no clue to date or circumstance; but it
implies that Peloponnesus was the region where the poet's genius ripened
and where he did the work which established his fame. This points to a
residence of considerable length; and it may be noted that some of the
poems illustrate their author's intimate knowledge of Peloponnesus. Thus in
Ode viii., for Automedes of Phlius, he draws on the legends connected with
the Phliasian river Asopus. In Ode x., starting from the Argive legend of
Proetus and Acrisius, he tells how the Arcadian cult of Artemis [Greek:
Hêmera] was founded. In one of his dithyrambs (xix.) he treated the legend
of Idas (a Messenian hero) and Marpessa in the form of a _hymenaeus_ sung
by maidens of Sparta.

The Alexandrian scholars, who drew up select lists of the best writers in
each kind, included Bacchylides in their "canon" of the nine lyric poets,
along with Alcman, Sappho, Alcaeus, Stesichorus, Ibycus, Anacreon,
Simonides and Pindar. The Alexandrian grammarian Didymus (_circ._ 30 B.C.)
wrote a commentary on the epinikian odes of Bacchylides. Horace, a poet in
some respects of kindred genius, was a student of his works, and imitated
him (according to Porphyrion) in _Odes_, i. 15, where Nereus predicts the
destruction of Troy. Quotations from Bacchylides, or references to him,
occur in Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Strabo, Plutarch, Stobaeus, Athenaeus,
Aulus Gellius, Zenobius, Hephaestion, Clement of Alexandria, and various
grammarians or scholiasts. Ammianus Marcellinus (xxv. 4) says that the
emperor Julian enjoyed reading Bacchylides. It is clear, then, that this
poet continued to be popular during at least the first four centuries of
our era. No inference adverse to his repute can fairly be drawn from the
fact that no mention of him occurs in the extant work of any Attic writer.
The only definite estimate of him by an ancient critic occurs in the
treatise [Greek: Peri Hupsous] commonly translated "On the Sublime," but
meaning rather, "On the Sources of Elevation in Style"; a work ambiguously
ascribed to Cassius Longinus (_circ._ A.D. 260), but more probably due to
some writer of the first century of our era. In chapter xxxiii. of that
treatise, the author asks whether we ought to prefer "greatness" in
literature, with some attendant faults, to flawless merit on a lower level,
and of course replies in the affirmative. In tragedy, he asks, who would be
Ion of Chios rather than Sophocles; or in lyric poetry, Bacchylides rather
than Pindar? Yet Bacchylides and Ion are "faultless, with a style of
perfect elegance and finish." In short, the essayist regards Bacchylides as
a thoroughly finished poet of the second class, who never commits glaring
faults, but never reaches the loftier heights.

The first and most general quality of style in Bacchylides is his perfect
simplicity and clearness. Where the text is not corrupt, there are few
sentences which are not lucid in meaning and simple in structure. This
lucidity is partly due, no doubt, to the fact that he seldom attempts
imagery of the bolder kind, and never has thoughts of a subtle or complex
order. Yet it would be very unjust to regard such clearness as merely a
compensatory merit of lyric mediocrity, or to ignore its intimate connexion
with the man's native grace of mind, with the artist's feeling for
expression, with the poet's delicate skill. How many readers, who could
enjoy and appreciate Pindar if he were less difficult, are stopped on the
threshold by the aspect of his style, and are fain to save their
self-esteem by concluding that he is at once turgid and shallow! A pellucid
style must always have been a source of wide, though modest, popularity for
Bacchylides. If it be true that Hiero preferred him to Pindar, and that he
was a favourite with Julian, those instances suggest the charm which he
must always have had for cultivated readers to whom affairs did not leave
much leisure for study, and who rejoiced in a poet with whom they could
live on such easy terms.

Another prominent trait in the style of Bacchylides is his love of
picturesque detail. This characteristic marks the fragment by which, before
the discovery of the 1896 MS., he was best known--a passage, from one of
his paeans, on the blessings of peace (fr. 13, Bergk, 3, Jebb); and it
frequently appears in the Odes, especially in the mythical narratives.
Greater poets can make an image flash upon the mind, as Pindar sometimes
does, by a magic phrase, or by throwing one or two salient points into
strong relief. The method of Bacchylides is usually quieter; he paints
cabinet pictures. Observation and elegance do more for him than grasp or
piercing insight; but his work is often of very high excellence in its own
kind. His treatment of simile is only a special phase of this general
tendency. It is exemplified by the touches with which he elaborates the
simile of the eagle in Ode v., and that of the storm-tossed mariners in Ode
xii. This full development of simile is Homeric in manner, but not Homeric
in motive: Homer's aim is vividness; Bacchylides is rather intent on the
decorative value of the details themselves. There are occasional flashes of
brilliancy in his imagery, when it is lit up by his keen sense of beauty or
splendour in external nature. A radiance, "as of fire," streams from the
forms of the Nereids (xvi. 103 ff.). An athlete shines out among his
fellows like "the bright moon of the mid-month night" among the stars
(viii. 27 ff.). The sudden gleam of hope which comes to the Trojans by the
withdrawal of Achilles is like a ray of sunshine "from beneath the edge of
a storm-cloud" (xii. 105 ff.). The shades of the departed, as seen by
Heracles on the banks of the Cocytus, are compared to the countless leaves
fluttering in the wind on "the gleaming headlands of Ida" (v. 65 ff.)--an
image not unworthy of Dante or of Milton.

Among the minor features of this poet's style the most remarkable is his
use of epithets. A god or goddess nearly always receives some ornamental
epithet; sometimes, indeed, two or even three (_e.g._ [Greek:
kalukostephanou semnas ... Artemidos leukôlenou], v. 98 f.). Such a trait
is in unison with the epic manner, the straightforward narrative, which we
find in some of the larger poems (as in v., x., and xvi.). On the other
hand, the copious use of such ornament has the disadvantage that it
sometimes gives a tinge of conventionality to his work. This impression is
somewhat strengthened by the fact that many [v.03 p.0123] of the epithets
are long compound words, not found elsewhere and (in some cases at least)
probably invented by the poet; words which suggest a deliberate effort to
vary the stock repertory.

The poems contained in the MS. of Bacchylides found (see below) in 1896 are
of two classes: I. _Odes of Victory_; II. _Dithyrambs_. The Ode of Victory,
[Greek: epinikion (melos] or [Greek: epinikos (humnos], is a form derived
from the [Greek: humnos], which was properly a song in praise of a deity.
Stesichorus (c. 610 B.C.) seems to have been the first who composed hymns
in honour, not of gods, but of heroes; the next step was to write hymns in
celebration of victories by living men. This custom arose in the second
half of the 6th century B.C., the age in which the games at the four great
Greek festivals reached the fulness of their popularity. Simonides (b. c.
556 B.C.) was the earliest recorded writer of _epinikia_. His odes of this
class are now represented only by a few very small fragments, some twenty
lines in all. Two of these fragments, belonging to the description of a
chariot-race, warrant the belief that Simonides, in his epinikia, differed
from Pindar in dwelling more on the incidents of the particular victory.
The same characteristic is found in the epinikia of Bacchylides. His fifth
ode, and Pindar's first _Olympian_, alike celebrate the victory of the
horse Pherenicus; but, while Pindar's reference to the race itself is
slight and general (vv. 20-22), Bacchylides describes the running of the
winner much more vividly and fully (vv. 37-49).

The MS. contains fourteen epinikia, or thirteen if Blass be right in
supposing that Odes vi. and vii., as numbered by Kenyon in the _editio
princeps_, are parts of a single ode (for Lachon of Ceos). Four (or on the
view just stated, three) of the odes relate to the Olympian festival; two
to the Pythian; three to the Isthmian; three to the Nemean; and one to a
Thessalian festival called the [Greek: Petraia]. This comes last. The order
in which the MS. arranges the other epinikia seems to be casual; at least
it does not follow (1) the alphabetical sequence of the victors' names, or
of the names of their cities; nor (2) chronological sequence; nor (3)
classification by contests; nor (4) classification by festivals--except
that the four great festivals precede the _Petraea_. The first ode,
celebrating a victory of the Cean Argeios at the Isthmus, may possibly have
been placed there for a biographical reason, viz., because the poet treated
in it the early legends of his native island.

A mythical narrative, connected in some way with the victor or his city,
usually occupies the central part of the Pindaric ode. It serves to lift
the poem into an ideal region, and to invest it with more than a local or
temporary significance. The method of Bacchylides in this department of the
epinikion is best illustrated by the myth of Croesus in Ode iii., that of
Heracles and Meleager in Ode v., and that of the Proetides in Ode x.
Pindar's habit is to select certain moments or scenes of a legend, which he
depicts with great force and vividness. Bacchylides, on the other hand, has
a gentle flow of simple epic narrative; he relies on the interest of the
story as a whole, rather than on his power of presenting situations.
Another element, always present in the longer odes of victory, is that
which may be called the "gnomic." Here, again, there is a contrast between
the two poets. Pindar packs his [Greek: gnômai], his maxims or moral
sentiments, into terse and sometimes obscure epigrams; he utters them in a
didactic tone, as of one who can speak with the commanding voice of Delphic
wisdom. The moralizing of Bacchylides is rather an utterance of quiet
meditation, sometimes recalling the strain of Ionian gnomic elegy.

The epinikia of Bacchylides are followed in the MS. by six compositions
which the Alexandrians classed under the general name of [Greek:
dithuramboi], and which we, too, must be content to describe collectively
as _Dithyrambs_. The derivation of [Greek: di-thurambos] is uncertain:
[Greek: di] may be the root seen in [Greek: dios] (cp. [Greek: dipolia],
and [Greek: thurambos] another form of [Greek: thriambos], a word by which
Cratinus (c. 448 B.C.) denotes some kind of hymn to the wine-god. The
"dithyramb," first mentioned by Archilochus (c. 670 B.C.), received a
finished and choral form from Arion of Lesbos (c. 600 B.C.). His
dithyrambs, produced at Corinth, belonged to the cult of Dionysus, and the
members of his chorus ([Greek: tragikos choros]) personated satyrs.
Originally concerned with the birth of the god, the dithyramb came to deal
with all his fortunes: then its scope became still larger; it might
celebrate, not Dionysus alone, but any god or hero. This last development
had taken place before the close of the 6th century B.C. Simonides wrote a
dithyramb on Memnon and Tithonus; Pindar, on Orion and on Heracles. Hence
the Alexandrian scholars used [Greek: dithurambos] in a wide sense, as
denoting simply a lyric poem occupied with a mythical narrative. Thus Ode
xvii. of Bacchylides (relating the voyage of Theseus to Crete), though it
was clearly a [Greek: paian] for the Delian Apollo, was classed by the
Alexandrians among his "dithyrambs"--as appears not only from its place in
our MS., but also from the allusion of Servius (on _Aen_. vi. 21). The six
dithyrambs of Bacchylides are arranged in (approximately) alphabetical
order: [Greek: Antênoridai, Hêraklês, Êitheoi ê Thêseus, Thêseus, Iô,
Idas]. The principal feature, best exemplified by the first and third, is
necessarily epic narrative,--often adorned with touches of picturesque
detail, and animated by short speeches in the epic manner.

Several other classes of composition are represented by those fragments of
Bacchylides, preserved in ancient literature, which were known before the
discovery of the new MS. (1) [Greek: humnoi]. Among these we hear of the
[Greek: apopemptikoi], hymns of pious farewell, speeding some god on his
way at the season when he passed from one haunt to another. (2) [Greek:
paianes], represented by the well-known fragment on the blessings of peace.
(3) [Greek: prosodia], choral odes sung during processions to temples. (4)
[Greek: huporchêmata], lively dance-songs for religious festivals. (5)
[Greek: erôtika], represented by five fragments of a class akin to [Greek:
skolia], drinking-songs. Under this head come some lively and humorous
verses on the power of wine, imitated by Horace (_Odes_, iii. 21. 13-20).
It may be conjectured that the facile grace and bright fancy of Bacchylides
were seen to especial advantage in light compositions of this kind. (6) The
elegiacs of Bacchylides are represented by two [Greek: epigrammata
anathêmatika], each of four lines, in the Palatine Anthology. The first
(_Anth_. vi. 313) is an inscription for an offering commemorative of a
victory gained by a chorus with a poem written by Bacchylides. The second
(_Anth_. vi. 53) is an inscription for a shrine dedicated to Zephyrus. Its
authenticity has been questioned, but not disproved.

The papyrus containing the odes of Bacchylides was found in Egypt by
natives, and reached the British Museum in the autumn of 1896. It was then
in about 200 pieces. By the skill and industry of Mr F. G. Kenyon, the
editor of the _editio princeps_ (1897), the MS. was reconstructed from
these lacerated members. As now arranged, the MS. consists of three
sections, (1) The first section contains 22 columns of writing. It breaks
off after the 8 opening verses of Ode xii. (2) The second section contains
columns 23-29. Of these, column 23 is represented only by the last letters
of two words. This section comprises what remains of Odes xiii. and xiv. It
breaks off before the end of xiv., which is the last of the epinikia. (3)
The third section comprises columns 30-39. It begins with the mutilated
opening verses of Ode xv. ([Greek: Antênoridai], the first of the
dithyrambs), and breaks off after verse 11 of the last dithyramb,[Greek:
Idas]. The number of lines in a column varies from 32 to 36, the usual
number being 35, or (though less often) 34.

It is impossible to say how much has been lost between the end of column 29
and the beginning of column 30. Probably, however, Ode xiv., if not the
last, was nearly the last of the epinikia. It concerns a festival of a
merely local character, the Thessalian [Greek: Petraia], and was therefore
placed after the thirteen other epinikia, which are connected with the four
great festivals. The same lacuna leaves it doubtful whether any collective
title was prefixed to the [Greek: dithuramboi]. After the last column (39)
of the MS., a good deal has probably been lost. Bacchylides seems to have
written at least three other poems of this class (on Cassandra, Laocoon and
Philoctetes); and these would have come, in alphabetical order, after the
last of the extant six (Idas).

The writing of the MS. is a fine uncial. It presents some traits of a
distinctly Ptolemaic type, though it lacks some features found in the
earlier Ptolemaic MSS. (those of the 3rd or 2nd century B.C.). Among the
characteristic forms of letters is the [form of Upsilon], with a shallow
curve on the top of the upright; a form found in MSS. ascribed to the 1st
century B.C., and different from the more fully formed upsilon of the Roman
period. Another very significant letter is the [Xi], written as [form of
Xi], a form which begins to go out after _c._ 50 B.C., giving place to one
in which the middle stroke is connected with the other two. From these and
other indications it is probable that the MS. is not later than the middle
of the 1st century B.C.

The scribe, though he sometimes corrected his own mistakes, was, on the
whole, careless of the sense, as of the metre; he seems to have been a
mechanical copyist, excellent in penmanship, but [v.03 p.0124] intent only
on the letters. The MS. has received corrections or small supplements from
at least two different persons. One of them (Kenyon's A²) was contemporary,
or nearly so, with the scribe. The other (A³) was considerably later; he
wrote a Roman cursive which might belong to the end of the 1st century
A.D., or to the early part of the 2nd. The correctors seem to be generally
trustworthy; though, like the scribe, they were inattentive to metre,
passing over many metrical faults which could easily have been removed.
They appear to have compared their MS. with another, or others; but they
sometimes made a bad use of such aid, intruding a false reading where their
text had the true one.

Breathings are generally added, especially rough breathings; the form is
usually square, but sometimes partially rounded. Accents are added, not to
all words, but only, as a rule, to those which might cause doubt or
difficulty to the reader. This was the Alexandrian practice, accents being
regarded as aids to correct reading, and more liberally used when the
dialect was not Attic. In accordance with the older system, the accent is
not written on the last syllable of a word; when the accent falls there, a
grave accent is written on the preceding syllable, or on two such syllables
(_e.g._ [Greek: blêchras, pauthalês]).

As Kenyon observes, no MS. of equal antiquity is so well supplied with
accents. The MS. which comes nearest to it in this respect is the Alcman
fragment in the Louvre, which is of similar or slightly higher age,
belonging perhaps to the early part of the 1st century A.D.; and in that
MS. the comparatively frequent accents were doubtless designed to aid
readers unfamiliar with Alcman's Laconian Doric. With regard to other
grammatical or metrical signs ([Greek: prosôidiai]) used in the Bacchylides
MS., there is not much that calls for special remark. The punctuation,
whether by the scribe or by correctors, is very sparse, and certainly
cannot always be regarded as authoritative. The signs denoting the end of a
strophe or antistrophe (_paragraphus_), of an epode (_coronis_), or of an
ode (_asterisk_), are often omitted by the scribe, and, when employed, are
sometimes placed incorrectly, or employed in an irregular manner.

EDITIONS.--F. G. Kenyon, _Ed. princeps_ (1897); F. Blass, 3rd ed. (1904);
H. Jurenka (1898); N. Festa, text, translation and notes (1898). [The
latest edition is by Sir Richard Jebb (1905), with introduction, notes,
translation, and bibliography; text only (1906). See also T. Zanghieri,
_Studi su Bacchilide, Bibliografia Bacchilidea, 1897-1905_ (1905)].

(R. C. J.)

[1] The references are given according to the numbering in Jebb's edition.

[2] For other explanations suggested, see Jebb's edition, Introd. p. 18.

BACCIO D'AGNOLO (_c._ 1460-1543), Florentine wood-carver, sculptor and
architect, had the family name of Baglioni, but was always known by the
abbreviation of Bartolommeo into Baccio and the use of d'Agnolo as meaning
the son of Angelo, his father's name. He started as a wood-carver, and
between 1491 and 1502 did much of the decorative carving in the church of
Santa Maria Novella and the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence. Having made his
reputation as a sculptor he appears to have turned his attention to
architecture, and to have studied at Rome, though at what precise date is
uncertain; but quite at the beginning of the 16th century he was engaged
with Simon Pollajuolo in restoring the Palazzo Vecchio, and in 1506 he was
commissioned to complete the drum of the cupola of the metropolitan church
of Santa Maria del Fiore. The latter work, however, was interrupted on
account of adverse criticisms from Michelangelo, and it remained
unexecuted. Baccio d' Agnolo also planned the Villa Borghese and the
Bartolini palace, with other fine palaces and villas. The Bartolini palace
was the first house to be given frontispieces of columns to the door and
windows, previously confined to churches; and he was ridiculed by the
Florentines for his innovation. Another much-admired work by him was the
campanile of the church of Santo Spirito. His studio was the resort of the
most celebrated artists of the day, Michelangelo, Sansovino, the brothers
Sangallo and the young Raphael. He died in 1543, leaving three sons, all
architects, the best-known being Giuliano.

BACH, JOHANN SEBASTIAN (1685-1750), German musical composer.

[Sidenote: Family.]

The Bach family was of importance in the history of music for nearly two
hundred years. Four branches of it were known at the beginning of the 16th
century, and in 1561 we hear of Hans Bach of Wechmar who is believed to be
the father of Veit Bach (born about 1555). The family genealogy, drawn up
by J. Sebastian Bach himself and completed by his son Philipp Emanuel,
describes Veit Bach as the founder of the family, a baker and a miller,
"whose zither must have sounded very pretty among the clattering of the
mill-wheels." His son, Hans Bach, "_der Spielmann_," is the first
professional musician of the family. Of Hans's large family the second son,
Christoph, was the grandfather of Sebastian Bach. Another son, Heinrich, of
Arnstadt, had two sons, Johann Michael and Johann Christoph, who are among
the greatest of J. S. Bach's forerunners, Johann Christoph being now
supposed (although this is still disputed) to be the author of the splendid
motet, _Ich lasse dich nicht_ ("I wrestle and pray"), formerly ascribed to
Sebastian Bach. Another descendant of Veit Bach, Johann Ludwig, was admired
more than any other ancestor by Sebastian, who copied twelve of his church
cantatas and sometimes added work of his own to them.

The Bach family never left Thuringia until the sons of Sebastian went into
a more modern world. Through all the misery of the peasantry at the period
of the Thirty Years' War this clan maintained its position and produced
musicians who, however local their fame, were among the greatest in Europe.
So numerous and so eminent were they that in Erfurt musicians were known as
"Bachs," even when there were no longer any members of the family in the
town. Sebastian Bach thus inherited the artistic tradition of a united
family whose circumstances had deprived them of the distractions of the
century of musical fermentation which in the rest of Europe had destroyed
polyphonic music.

[Sidenote: Biography.]

Johann Sebastian Bach was baptized at Eisenach on the 23rd of March 1685.
His parents died in his tenth year, and his elder brother, Johann
Christoph, organist at Ohrdruf, took charge of him and taught him music.
The elder brother is said to have been jealous of Sebastian's talent, and
to have forbidden him access to a manuscript volume of works by Froberger,
Buxtehude and other great organists. Every night for six months Sebastian
got up, put his hand through the lattice of the bookcase, and copied the
volume out by moonlight, to the permanent ruin of his eyesight (as is shown
by all the extant portraits of him at a later age and by the blindness of
his last years). When he had finished, his brother discovered the copy and
took it away from him. In 1700 Sebastian, now fifteen and thrown on his own
resources by the death of his brother, went to Lüneburg, where his
beautiful soprano voice obtained him an appointment at the school of St
Michael as chorister. He seems, however, to have worked more at
instrumental than at vocal music. Apart from the choristers' routine, his
position provided only for his general education, and we know little about
his definite musical instructors. In any case he owed his musical
development mainly to his own incessant study of classical and contemporary
composers, such as Frescobaldi (_c._ 1587), Caspar Kerl (1628-1693),
Buxtehude, Froberger, Muffat the elder, Pachelbel and probably Johann
Joseph Fux (1660-1741), the author of the _Gradus ad Parnassum_ on which
all later classical composers were trained. A prettier and no less
authentic story than that of his brother's forbidden organ-volume tells
how, on his return from one of the many holiday expeditions which Bach made
to Hamburg on foot to hear the great Dutch organist Reinken, he sat outside
an inn longing for the dinner he could not afford, when two herring-heads
were flung out of the window, and he found in each of them a ducat with
which he promptly paid his way, not home, but back to Hamburg. At Hamburg,
also, Keiser was laying the foundations of German opera on a splendid scale
which must have fired Bach's imagination though it never directly
influenced his style. On the other hand Keiser's church music was of
immense importance in his development. In Celle the famous _Hofkapelle_
brought the influence of French music to bear upon Bach's art, an influence
which inspired nearly all his works in suite-form and to which his many
autograph copies of Couperin's music bear testimony. Indeed, there is no
branch of music, from Palestrina onwards, conceivably accessible in Bach's
time, of which we do not find specimens carefully copied in his own
handwriting. On the other hand, when Bach, at the age of nineteen, became
organist at Arnstadt, he found Lübeck within easy distance, and there, in
October 1705, he went to hear Buxtehude, whose organ works show so close an
affinity to Bach's style that only their lack of coherence as wholes
reveals to the attentive listener that with all their nobility they are not
by Bach himself. Bach's enthusiasm for Buxtehude caused him to outstay his
leave by three months, and this, together with his [v.03 p.0125] habit of
astonishing the congregation by the way he harmonized the chorales got him
into trouble. But he was already too great an ornament to be lightly
dismissed; and though his answers to the complaints of the authorities
(every word of which makes amusing reading in the archives of the church)
were spirited rather than satisfactory, and the _consistorium_ had to add
to their complaints the grave scandal of his allowing a "strange maiden" to
sing in the church,[1] Bach was able to maintain his position at Arnstadt
until he obtained the organistship of St Blasius in Mühlhausen in 1707.
Here he married his cousin, easily identified with the "strange maiden" of
Arnstadt; and here he wrote his first great church cantatas, _Aus der
Tiefe_, _Gott ist mein König_ and _Gottes Zeit_.

Bach's mastery of the keyboard attracted universal attention, and prevented
his ever being unemployed. In 1708 he went to Weimar where his successes
were crowned by his appointment, in 1714, at the age of twenty-nine, as
_Hofkonzertmeister_ to the duke of Weimar. Here the composition of sacred
music was one of his most congenial duties, and the great cantata, _Ich
hatte viel Bekümmerniss_, was probably the first work of his new office. In
1717 Bach visited Dresden in the course of a concert tour, and was induced
to challenge the arrogant French organist, J. Louis Marchand, who was
making himself thoroughly disliked by the German musicians who could not
deny his powers. Bach was first given an opportunity of listening secretly
to Marchand's playing, then a competition on the organ was proposed, and a
day was fixed for the tournament at which all the court and all the musical
celebrities of the town were to be present, to see nothing less than the
issue between French and German music. Marchand took up the challenge
contemptuously, but it would appear that he also was allowed to listen
secretly to Bach's playing, for on the day of the tournament the only news
of him was that he had left Dresden by the earliest coach.

This triumph was followed by Bach's appointment as _Kapellmeister_ to the
duke of Cöthen, a post which he held from 1717 to 1723. The Cöthen period
is that of Bach's central instrumental works, such as the first book of the
_Wohltemperirtes Klavier_, the solo violin and violoncello sonatas, the
Brandenburg concertos, and the French and English suites.

In 1723, finding his position at Cöthen uninspiring for choral music, he
removed to Leipzig, where he became cantor of the Thomasschule, being still
able to retain his post as visiting _Kapellmeister_ at Cöthen, besides a
similar position at Weissenfels. His wife had died in 1720, leaving seven
children, of whom Friedermann and Philipp Emanuel had a great future before
them. (For his sons see BACH, K. P. E., below.) In December 1721 Bach
married again, and for the beautiful soprano voice of his second wife he
wrote many of his most inspired arias. She was a great help to him with all
his work, and her musical handwriting soon became so like his own that her
copies are difficult to distinguish from his autographs. In 1729 Bach heard
that Handel was for a second time visiting Halle on his way back to London
from Italy. A former attempt of Bach's to meet Handel had failed, and now
he was too ill to travel, so he sent his son to Halle to invite Handel to
Leipzig; but the errand was not successful, and much to Bach's
disappointment he never met his only compeer. Bach so admired Handel that
he made a manuscript copy of his _Passion nach Brockes_. This work, though
almost unknown in England then as now, was, next to the oratorios of
Keiser, incomparably the finest Passion then accessible, as Graun's
beautiful masterpiece, _Der Tod Jesu_, was not composed until four years
after Bach's death. The disgusting poem of Brockes (which was set by every
German composer of the time) was transformed by Bach with real literary
skill as the groundwork of the non-scriptural numbers in his _Passion
according to St John_.

All Bach's most colossal achievements, such as the _Passion according to St
Matthew_ and the _B Minor Mass_ (for discussion of which see ORATORIO and
MASS), date from his cantorship at Leipzig. But, important and congenial as
was his position there, and smooth as the course of his life seems to have
been until his death in 1750, he must have had quite as much experience as
can have been good for him. He was often ruffled by the town councillors of
Leipzig, who (like his earlier employers at Arnstadt) were shocked by the
"unecclesiastical style" of his compositions and by his independent
bearing. But he had more serious troubles. Of his seven children by his
first wife only three survived him. By his second wife he had thirteen
children, of whom he lost four of the six sons. For the head of so large a
family his post was dignified rather than lucrative, and few documents tell
a prouder tale of uncomplaining thrift than the inventory of his
possessions made after his death. One can only be thankful that he did not
live to see anything but the wonderful promise of his son Friedermann, who,
in the words of the brilliantly successful K. Philipp Emanuel Bach, was
more nearly capable of replacing his father than all the rest of the family
together. The prospect of complete loss of the tradition of his own
polyphonic art he faced with equanimity, saying of the new style, which in
the hands of his own son, Philipp Emanuel, was soon to eclipse it for the
next hundred years, "The art has advanced to great heights: the old style
of music no longer pleases our modern ears." But it would have broken his
heart if he had forseen that Friedermann Bach was to attain a disreputable
old age after a dissolute and unproductive life.

The brilliant successes of Philipp Emanuel led to his appointment as
court-composer to the king of Prussia and hence, in 1747, to Sebastian's
being summoned to visit Frederick the Great at Potsdam, an incident which
Bach always regarded as the culmination of his career, much as Dr Johnson
regarded his interview with George III. Bach had to play on the numerous
newly invented pianofortes of Silbermann which the king had bought, and
also to try the organs of the churches of Potsdam. Frederick, whose musical
reputation rested on a genuine if narrow basis, gave him a splendid theme
on which to extemporize; and on that theme Bach afterwards wrote _Das
musikalische Opfer_. Two years after this event his sight began to fail,
and before long he shared the fate of Handel in becoming perfectly
blind.[2]

Bach died of apoplexy on the 28th of July 1750. His loss was deplored as
that of one of the greatest organists and clavier players of his time. Of
his compositions comparatively little was known. At his death his MS. works
were divided amongst his sons, and many of them have been lost; only a
small fraction of his greater works was recovered when, after the lapse of
nearly a century, the verdict of his neglectful posterity was reversed by
the modern upholders of polyphonic art. Even now some important works are
still apparently irrecoverable.

[Sidenote: Work and influence.]

The rediscovery of Bach is closely connected with the name of Mendelssohn,
who was amongst the first to proclaim by word and deed the powers of a
genius too gigantic to be grasped by three generations. By the enthusiastic
endeavours of Mendelssohn, Schumann and others, and in England still
earlier by the performances and publications of Wesley and Crotch, the
circle of Bach's worshippers rapidly increased. In 1850, a century after
his death, a society was started for the correct publication of all Bach's
remaining works. Robert Franz, the great song-writer, did good service in
arranging some of Bach's finest works for modern performance, until the
experience of a purer scholarship could prove not only the possibility but
the incomparably greater beauty of a strict adherence to Bach's own
scoring. The Porson of Bach-scholarship, however, is Wilhelm Rust (grandson
of the interesting composer of that name who wrote polyphonic suites and
fantasias early in the 19th century). During the fourteen years of his
editorship of the _Bach-Gesellschaft_ he displayed a steadily increasing
insight into Bach's style which has never since been rivalled. In more than
one case he has restored harmonies of priceless value from incomplete
texts, by means of research and reasoning which he sums up in a modest
footnote that reads as something self-evident. His prefaces to the
_Bach-Gesellschaft_ volumes are perhaps the most valuable contributions to
the criticism of 18th-century music ever written, Spitta's great biography
not excepted.

[v.03 p.0126] Bach's importance in the history of music cannot be
exaggerated. His art, neglected as old-fashioned and crabbed by his younger
contemporaries, survived only in certain limited aspects as the subject of
a desultory and unintelligent academic study, until its re-discovery by
Mendelssohn. And yet, whatever disguise may have been foisted on it by
corrupt traditions and ignorance of its idioms, whenever any fragment of it
gained the inner ear of a true composer the effect on the history of music
was immediate and profound. Indeed his influence is by no means chiefly
manifested in the time when his work became known in its larger aspects,
though the Bach-revival is very obviously connected with certain tendencies
in the "Romantic" movement in music. But, however clear we may consider
Bach's claim to the title of "the first of Romanticists," the full
influence of his whole work has hardly yet begun to show itself. Schumann
died before even such enthusiasts as the editors of the _Bach-Gesellschaft_
began to find more beauty than extravagance in Bach's ordinary musical
language (see, for example, Hauptmann's letters _passim_, _The Letters of a
Leipzig Cantor_, trans. by A. D. Coleridge, London, Novello, Ewer, 1892),
or, indeed, to grasp the main features of his designs.[3] The labours of
the _Bach-Gesellschaft_ have occupied more than fifty years, during which
about four-fifths of Bach's choral works have been published for the first
time; and it would be surprising if another fifty years sufficed to make
these adequately known to the world at large. It is difficult to make an
anthology of such bulky works as church-cantatas, nor does an anthology
meet the purpose where the whole work so constantly attains that excellence
for which the anthologist seeks. Except for practical difficulties (as when
Bach writes for obsolete instruments) the only reason why some cantatas are
better known than others is that a beginning must be made somewhere.
Indeed, a cantata was recently selected, on the ground of its popularity,
for a choral competition in a small English country town the year before it
was performed as a novelty in Berlin!

It is clear, then, that the influence of Bach's art as an understood whole
is still undeveloped. In the past history of music his part was hardly
suspected except by the great composers themselves; and, to any one
contemplating the art of the generation after him, it might have seemed
that both he and Handel had worked in vain. Yet his was the most subtle and
universal force in the development of music, even when his musical language
seemed hopelessly forgotten. Mozart, when rapidly advancing to the height
of his mastery, had but to read the Baron von Swieten's manuscript copies
of the motets and of the _Wohltemperirtes Klavier_, and his style, quite
apart from his immediate essays in the old art-forms, and apart also from
the influence of his study of Handel, developed a new polyphonic richness
and depth of harmony which steadily increased until his untimely death.
Beethoven studied all the accessible works of Bach profoundly, and
frequently quoted them in his sketch-books, often with a direct bearing on
his own works. His rendering of the _Wohltemperirtes Klavier_ is said to be
recorded in the marks of expression and _tempo_ given in Czerny's edition;
and if that record is true, Beethoven must have been completely in the dark
as to Bach's meaning in many important respects; but art is full of such
illustrations of the way in which great minds influence each other in spite
of every barrier which diversity of language and time can set. Beethoven's
great Thirty-three Variations on a Waltz by Diabelli were actually
described in the publisher's puff as worthy of their kinship with the
"Goldberg Variations" of Bach; and that kinship is revealed in its truest
light by a comparison between Beethoven's 31st variation and Bach's 25th;
for here, just where the resemblance is most obvious, each composer utters
his most intimate expression of feeling.

In the same way, Chopin is nowhere more characteristic than where he shows
his love of the _Wohltemperirtes Klavier_ in his Études and Preludes; and
so subtle is the influence of polyphonic style even over a writer so little
apt to make direct use of it as Chopin, that one of Schumann's few
plagiarisms occurs in his use of a phrase from Chopin's F minor Étude
(written for the _Méthode des méthodes_) as the subject of a fugue (Op. 72,
No. 3). And, apart from fugues, which Schumann cultivated assiduously at a
late stage in his career, the influence of Bach pervades the texture and
rhythm of his work in more ways than can easily be followed.

In a more external, but not less significant way, the _Passion according to
St Matthew_ made its mark on Mendelssohn from the time when he discovered
it at the age of twelve, and suggested to him many features in the general
design of oratorios, by means of which he rescued that branch of art from
the operatic influences that ruined Beethoven's _Mount of Olives_. Without
the example of Bach, Wagner's schemes of _Leitmotif_ would never in his
lifetime have become woven into that close polyphonic texture which secures
for his music a flow as continuous as that of drama itself:--and intimately
connected with this is the whole subject of Wagner's harmonization, which
in many of its boldest characteristics was foreshadowed by Bach. A close
study of the texture of Brahms's work shows that he develops Bach's and
Beethoven's artistic devices _pari passu_, and that the result is a
complete unification of that opposition between polyphony and form which in
the infancy of the sonata (as in every transitional stage in musical
history) threatened to wreck the art as a false antithesis wrecks a
philosophy. Perhaps the only great composers who escaped the direct
influence of Bach are Gluck and Berlioz. Even Gluck reproduced in every
detail of harmony and figure the first twelve bars of the _Gigue_ of Bach's
B flat Clavier-Partita in the aria "Je t'implore et je tremble" in
_Iphigénie en Tauride_. But plagiarism, however unconscious, is a very
different thing from that profound indebtedness which makes a great man
attain his truest originality; and Gluck's training practically deprived
him of Bach's direct influence, useful as that would have been to the
attainment of his aims in harmonic and choral expression. The indirect
influence no one could escape, for whatever in modern music is not
traceable to Sebastian Bach is traceable to his sons, who were encouraged
by their father in the cultivation of those infant art-forms which were so
soon to dazzle the world into the belief that his own work was obsolete.

Bach's place in music is thus far higher than that of a reformer, or even
of an inventor of new forms. He is a spectator of all musical time and
existence, to whom it is not of the smallest importance whether a thing be
new or old, so long as it is true. It is doubtful whether even the forms
most peculiar to him (such as the arpeggio-prelude) are of his invention.
Yet he left no form as he found it,--not even that most conventional of
all, the Da Capo Aria, which he did not outwardly alter in the least. On
the other hand, with every form he touched he said the last word. All the
material that could be assimilated into a mature art he vitalized in his
own way, and he had no imitators. The language of music changed at his
death, and his influence became all-pervading just because he was not the
prophet of the new art, but an unbiassed seeker of truth. Whether so great
a man becomes "progressive" or "reactionary" depends on the artistic
resources of his time. He will always work at the kind of art that is most
complete and consistent in all its aspects. The same spirit of truthfulness
that makes Sebastian Bach hold himself aloof from the progressive art which
he encourages in his sons, drives Beethoven to invent new forms and new
means of expression with every work he writes. Gluck abolished the Da Capo
Aria, because it was unfit for dramatic music. Bach did not abolish it,
because he did not intend to write dramatic music in the strict sense of
the term. Mature musical art in Bach's time could not be dramatic, except
in the loose sense in which the term may be applied to an epic poem.
Dramatic expression, properly so called, can only be attained in music by
the full development of resources that do not blend with those of Bach's
art at all. Meanwhile there are many things unsuitable for the stage which
are nevertheless valuable on purely musical grounds; and the Da Capo Aria
was one. Bach [v.03 p.0127] developed it in a great variety of ways, while
retaining even the minor details of what in other hands had long before
become its conventional form; but the one thing he did not do was to abuse
it according to time-honoured custom as the staple form for opera. For that
he had too much dramatic insight. His treatment of other important
art-forms is illustrated in the articles on CONTRAPUNTAL FORMS; CONCERTO
and INSTRUMENTATION. Here we may attempt to illustrate his methods by such
forms and characteristics as cannot be classified under those headings.

[Sidenote: Illustrations of Bach's method.]

1. The toccatas of Buxtehude and his predecessors show how an effective
musical scheme may be suggested by running over the keyboard of an organ as
if to try (_toccare_) the touch, then bursting out into sustained and full
harmony, and at last settling down to a fugue. But before Bach no one
seemed able to keep the fugue in motion long enough to make a convincing
climax. Very soon it collapsed and the process of quasi-extemporization
began again, to culminate in a new fugue which often gave the whole work a
happy but deceptive suggestion of organic unity by being founded on an
ingenious variation of the subject of the first fugue. But in Bach's hands
the toccata becomes one of the noblest and most plastic of forms. The
introductory runs may be disjointed and exaggerated to grotesqueness, until
the gaps between them gradually fill out, and they build themselves up into
grand piles of musical architecture, as in the organ toccata in C; or they
may be worked out on an enormous scale in long and smooth canonic passages
with a definite theme, as in the greatest of all toccatas, that in F for
organ, which is most artistically followed by a fugue unusually quiet for
its size. In one instance, the toccata at the beginning of the E minor
clavier-partita, the introductory runs, though retaining much of the
extempore character from which the form derives its name, take shape in a
highly organized and rounded-off group of contrasted themes. The fugue
follows without change of time, and is developed in so leisurely a manner
that it is fully as long as a normal fugue on a large scale by the time it
reaches what sounds like its central episode. At this point some of the
introductory matter quietly enters, and leads to a recapitulation of the
whole introduction in the key now reached. The obvious sequel would be a
counter-development of the fugue, at least as long as what has gone before,
as in the clavier-toccata in C minor; but Bach does not choose to weary the
hearer and weaken the impression of breadth he has already made here.
Instead, he expands this restatement of the introduction, and makes its
harmonies deliberately return to the fundamental key, and thus in an
astonishingly short time the toccata is brought to a close with the utmost
effect of climax and finality. The same grasp of all the possible meanings
of an artistic device shows itself in his treatment of the other features
of toccata form. With his variety of proportion and flow he has no need to
break off the fugue like earlier composers: but all the old devices by
which the division into sections was managed are turned to account by him,
and almost every toccata has its own scheme of contrasted movements, always
based on the old natural idea of the growth of an organized music from a
chaos of extemporization.

If this is Bach's treatment of a comparatively small and specialized
art-form, it is obviously impossible to reduce the scantiest account of the
rest of his work into practical limits here, nor is there as yet a
sufficient body of accepted criticism of Bach for such an account to carry
further conviction than an expression of individual opinion. Fortunately,
however, Bach was constantly re-arranging his own compositions; indeed he
evidently regards adaptability to fresh environment as the test of his
finest work: and we cannot do better than review the evidence thus given to
us,--evidence which only Beethoven's sketch-books surpass in significance.

2. The successful transplanting of a work of art to a fresh environment is
obviously a convincing test of our definitions of the art-forms concerned,
if only we take care to distinguish between the alterations produced by the
change of environment and those that imply the composer's dissatisfaction
with the original version. In Bach's case this seldom causes much
difficulty; his methods of adaptation are so logical and so varied as to
form a scheme of musical morphology with all the interest and none of the
imperfections of the geological record; and the few cases in which a work
owes its changes to the need for improvement as well as adaptation cause no
confusion, but rather form a link between the pure adaptations and the
numerous revisions of his favourite works without change of medium. There
is, for example, no difficulty in separating the element of corrective
criticism from that of the impulse to give an already successful
composition a larger or more permanent form, in such cases as the
transformations undergone by the movements of the birthday cantata, _Was
mir behagt ist nur die muntre Jagd_, during their distribution among the
church cantatas, _Also hat Gott die Welt geliebt_ and _Man singet mit
Freuden vom Sieg_. The fine bass aria, "Ein Fürst ist seines Landes Pan,"
was obviously ill-proportioned, with its breakneck return to the tonic and
its perfunctory close; and Bach's chief concern in adapting it for its
place as the aria, "Du bist geboren mir zu Gute," in _Also hat Gott_, was
to remedy this defect. On the other hand, the use of the delightful
ritornello for violoncello from the little aria, "Weil die wollenreichen
Heerden," in the birthday cantata, and the restoration of the rejected long
instrumental _fugato_ that was to follow, were obviously brought about by
the conception of the entirely new material for the voice in the famous
aria, "Mein gläubiges Herze." And when the last chorus of _Was mir behagt_
became the first chorus of _Man singet mit Freuden_, it was expanded to the
proportions necessary for a triumphant opening (as distinguished from a
cheerful finale) by the adroit insertion of new material between every
joint in the design. This material, being new, could not produce the effect
of diffuseness that would result from the expansion of the old material
already complete in its simplest form, and thus this instance does not
imply criticism.

A highly interesting example of pure self-criticism is the _Passion
according to St John_, which was twice revised, and each time reduced to a
smaller scale by the omission of some of its finest numbers. The final
result was a work of perfect proportions, and of the rejected numbers one
(a magnificent aria with chorale) remained unused, two were replaced by
finer substitutes, others took shape as one of the most complete and
remarkable of the church cantatas, _Du wahrer Gott_, while the greatest of
the figured chorales was transferred to the _Passion according to St
Matthew_, of which it now crowns the first part.

3. Such instances of self-criticism might be paralleled in the works of
other composers; but there is no parallel in music to Bach's power of
reproducing already perfect works in different media. Here Bach reveals to
us identities in difference which we should otherwise never have suspected.
Of course it is possible to arrange works in different ways without
illustrating any profound identities at all. Handel, for instance,
collected several of his favourite choruses in an enormous instrumental
concerto (see vol. 46 of the _Händel-Gesellschaft_), and the result in the
case of a chorus like "Lift up your Heads" was ridiculous. Bach, however,
does not arrange old work merely to please a court where it was already
admired. He never leaves it in a state of mere make-shift, though he cannot
always attain his evident aim of a new originality. His methods of
orchestration and the profoundly significant identity of certain forms of
chorus with certain concerto forms may better be described under their
proper headings (see articles INSTRUMENTATION and CONCERTO). Here we will
attempt first to show, by illustrations of Bach's power of adding parts to
already complete harmonic and contrapuntal schemes, what was his conception
of the nature of an art-form, and secondly, by means of a short analysis of
cases in which he adapts the same music to different words, to define his
range of expression.

Bach arranged all his violin concertos for clavier, including two that are
lost in the original version. Here his power of providing new and
apparently necessary material for the left hand of the cembalist (or, in
the double concertos, two left [v.03 p.0128] hands) without disturbing the
already complete score, is astonishing; and it fails only in the slow
movements, which he prefers to leave obviously in the condition of an
arrangement rather than to spoil their broad cantabile style by a too
polyphonic bass.

But these cases are insignificant compared with such transformations as
that of the prelude of the E major partita for unaccompanied violin into
the sinfonia for organ obligato accompanied by full orchestra (including
three trumpets and a pair of drums) at the beginning of the church cantata,
_Wir danken dir, Gott._ The original version is perhaps the most complete
and natural of the violin solos, for its arpeggios produce full harmony
without recourse to that constant attempt to play on all four strings at
once, which makes the performance of the polyphonic movements a _tour de
force_ in which steady rhythm is nearly impossible. Yet in the sinfonia its
proportions seem to reveal themselves for the first time. Not a bar is
displaced and not a note of the new accompaniment is unnecessary. The whole
is almost entirely without themes; for even this, the largest of all
arpeggio-preludes, consists essentially of the gradual unfolding of a
scheme of harmony in which rhythmic and melodic organization is reduced to
a minimum. Only in the first line does the incisive initial figure persist
a little longer in the new accompaniment than in the original solo, but on
the last page it reappears and pervades the whole orchestra, even the drums
thundering out its rhythm at the climax where the holding-notes of the
trumpet span the torrent of harmony like a rainbow.

Deeper still is the thought that underlies the transformation of two
movements of the great violin-concerto in D minor (unfortunately lost
except in its splendid arrangement for clavier) into parts of the church
cantata, _Wir müssen durch viel Trübsal in das Reich Gottes eingehen_. In
both movements the violin is replaced by the organ an octave lower, the
orchestral accompaniment remaining where it was. This treatment, with the
addition of new and plaintive parts for wind instruments, turns the already
very long and sombre first movement into an impressive idealization of the
"much tribulation" that lies between us and the kingdom of heaven. The slow
movement is still more solemn, and is arranged in the same way as regards
the instruments; but from the first note to the last a four-part chorus
sings, to the words of the title, a mass of quite new material (except for
the bass and for numerous imitations of the solo-part), treated with every
variety of vocal colouring and a grandeur of conception which is not
dwarfed even by the _Passion according to St Matthew._

4. The four short masses, the Christmas oratorio and the B minor mass,
contain every variety of adaptation from earlier work. The four short
masses are indeed obviously compiled for use in a church where the
orchestra was small. Only four movements in the whole collection are not
traceable to other extant works; all the rest comes from church cantatas.
The adaptations are not always significant; no attempt, for example, is
made in the G minor mass to conceal how unfit for a _Kyrie eleison_ is the
tremendous denunciatory chorus, _Herr, deine Augen sehen nach dem Glauben_.
But the F major and G major masses are very instructive; and the A major
mass, except for the damage done to the instrumentation, is a work that no
one would conceive to be not original. The Kyrie is one of Bach's most
individual utterances and could surely never have fitted any other text,
but we should say the same of the Gloria if we did not possess the church
cantata, _Halt im Gedächtniss_. The Gloria begins with a triumphant
polyphonic chorus accompanied by a spirited symphony for strings. At the
words "et in terra pax" the time changes, and two flutes softly accompany a
single solemn melody in the altos. At the "laudamus te" the material of the
beginning returns, and is interrupted again by the calm slow movement, this
time in another key and for another voice, at the words "adoramus te."
Twice the "laudamus" and "adoramus" alternate in a finely proportioned
design; at last the words "gratias agimus tibi propter magnam gloriam tuam"
are set for the full chorus to the music of the slow movement, the strings
join with the flutes, and this most appropriate setting of those words is
finished. And yet it is quite impossible to regard this as superseding the
last chorus of _Halt im Gedächtniss_. Not one bar or harmony of the
framework differs; yet the two versions are two independent works of art.
In the cantata the beginning is for instruments only; when the slow
movement (here adequately scored for a flute and two _oboe d' amore_)
begins, the basses, permanently separated from the rest of the chorus, sing
"Peace be unto you." The other voices then sing the triumph of the faithful
helped by the Saviour in their battle against the world. The slow movement
is, of course, set for bass alone throughout, and at the last recurrence of
the _allegro_ the bass continues to sing "Friede sei mit euch" through the
rest of the chorus, as if leading the chorus of humanity through strife to
the kingdom of heaven, and then the single voice of peace remains to the
end. Hardly a bar of the chorus-material is on the same themes in the two
versions.

The study of the sources of the Christmas oratorio will complete the
evidence on which we support our estimate of Bach's methods and range of
expression. It is certain that the occasional cantatas, from which all
except the chorale-tune numbers and those set to words from the Bible were
taken, date from shortly before the oratorio; and that Bach, being
incapable of putting inferior work even into birthday odes, rescued it from
oblivion by having the verses for the oratorio numbers built on the same
rhythms as those of the odes in order that he might use those occasional
works as a sketch (see _B.-G._, _Jahr._ xxxiv. preface). Be this as it may,
the alterations are confined to details even where an aria is transposed a
fourth or fifth; but the effect of them is startling. Pleasure (Wollust)
sings a lovely soprano aria to allure Hercules from the paths of Virtue, to
which Hercules replies indignantly with an aria in a spirited staccato
style. It is no doubt a shock to our feelings to find that Wollust's aria
became the Virgin's cradle-song, while Hercules's reply became the alto
aria in which Zion is bidden to "prepare for the Bridegroom." But it does
not warrant the inference that Bach's music lacks definite
characterization: on the contrary, these two arias are the best
demonstration of his profound insight into the possibilities of musical
expression within his range. It is no part of his conception of art that
Wollust should be represented by a Wagnerian Venusberg-music; the obvious
way to represent Pleasure was by writing pleasant music, and with Bach's
ideas of pleasance the step from this to the solemn beauty of the sacred
cradle-song was a mere matter of change of colour and _tempo_. The key is
lowered from B flat to G, the strings are veiled with the tender reed tone
of a group of _oboe d' amore_, the soprano becomes an alto whose notes are,
as it were, surrounded with a nimbus by being doubled in the upper octave
by a flute; and the aria becomes worthy of its new purpose, not by losing a
grossness which it never possessed, but by gaining the richness which
distinguishes the perfect work from the boldly executed draft.

As to the aria of Hercules the change is in manner, while the character, in
the human sense of the term, is quite rightly the same. Both Hercules and
the faithful Christian of the oratorio are renouncing pomps and vanities
for the claims of a higher life; in the one case indignantly, in the other
case inspired "mit zärtlichem Triebe." A change to a _legato_ style, the
substitution of a single _oboe d' amore_ for _tutti_ violins, the addition
of delicate ornaments indicative of a slower pace, and the noble stream of
melody preserve its identity while changing its aspect. Bach's larger
designs react on their changing contents as a cathedral reacts on the
impressiveness of the rites performed within it, or as nature reacts on a
poet's thoughts; and in the same way Bach's melody is greater than any
possible mood of the moment, not because of that vague and negative
pseudo-classical quality misnamed "reserve," but because of its vital
individuality. In their proper directions its changes are limitless;
elsewhere change is inconceivable. No amount of "Umarbeitung" could, for
instance, turn the aria of Hercules into the Virgin's cradle-song, or
Wollust's aria into the exhortation of Zion to prepare for the Bridegroom.
In short, Bach's melodies are characteristic, not like a mask with a set
expression, but like a living face that is the more individual for the
mobility of its features.

[v.03 p.0129] Within these limits, that is, short of dramatic expression in
just so far as "the end of drama is not character but action," there is
nothing good that Bach's art does not express. He has plenty of humour, if
the term may be applied to art which is, so to speak, always literal,--art
in which a jest is a jest and serious things are treated with familiar
directness, and all, whether in jest or earnest, is primarily beautiful. In
_Der Streit zwischen Phoebus und Pan_ Bach answers the critics who censured
him for his pedantry and provincial ignorance of the grand Italian operatic
style, by making effective use of that style in Pan's prize-aria ("Zum
Tanze, zum Sprunge, so wack-ack-ack-ackelt das Herz"), nobly representing
his own style in Phoebus's aria, and promptly caricaturing it in the second
part of Pan's ("Wenn der Ton zu mühsam klingt"). Midas votes for Pan--"denn
nach meinen beiden Ohren singt er unvergleichlich schön." At the word
"Ohren" the violins give a pianissimo "hee-haw" which is fully as witty in
its musical aptness as Mendelssohn's clown-theme in the Overture to the
_Midsummer Night's Dream_; and in the ensuing dialogue their prophecy is
verified. As with many other great artists, Bach's playfulness occasionally
showed itself inconveniently where little things shock little minds. The
hilarious aria, "Ermuntre dich," in the church cantata, _Schmücke dich, o
liebe Seele_, is one instance, and the quaint representation of the words
"dimisit inanes" in the _Magnificat_ is another. This great work, one of
the most terse and profound things Bach ever wrote, contains, among many
other subtle inspirations, one conception with which we may fitly end our
survey, for it strongly suggests Bach himself and the destiny of all that
work which he finished so lovingly, with no prospect of its becoming more
than a family heirloom and a salutary tradition in his Leipzig
choir-school. In the _Magnificat_ he sets the words "quia respexit
humilitatem ancillae suae" to a touchingly appropriate soprano solo
accompanied by his favourite _oboe d'amore_. With the next sentence "ecce
enim beatam me dicent" the tone brightens to a quiet joy, but Bach takes
advantage of the syntax of the Latin in a way that defies translation, and
the sentence is finished by the chorus. "Omnes generationes" seem indeed to
pass before us in the crowded fugue which rises in perpetual stretto, the
incessant entries of its subject now mounting the whole scale, each part a
step higher than the last, and now collecting in unison with a climax of
closeness and volume overwhelming in its impression of time and multitude.

SUMMARY OF BACH'S WORKS

No attempt is here made at chronological sequence. The changes in Bach's
style, though clear and important, are almost impossible to describe in
untechnical language; nor are they of such general interest as to make it
worth while to expand this summary by an attempt to apportion its contents
among the Arnstadt-Mühlhausen period, the Weimar period, the Cöthen period
(chiefly remarkable for instrumental music and comparatively uninteresting
in its easy-going choral music), and the last period (1733-1750) in which,
while the choral works became at once more numerous and more terse (_e.g._
_Jesu, der du meine Seele_) the instrumental music, though never diffuse,
shows an increasing preference for designs on a large scale. (Compare, for
example, the second book of the _Wohltemperirtes Klavier_, 1744, with the
first, 1722.)

I.--CHURCH MUSIC

A. _With Orchestra_

190 church cantatas: besides several which are only known from fragmentary
sets of parts. Of the 190, 40 are for solo voices, about 60 (including some
solo cantatas) are more or less founded on chorales, and the rest, though
almost invariably containing a chorale (for congregational singing), are
practically short oratorios and frequently so entitled by Bach himself.

3 wedding cantatas: the Easter oratorio (exactly like the above-mentioned
oratorio-cantatas; and the Christmas oratorio (six similar cantatas forming
a connected design for performance on six separate days).

The Passions according to St Matthew and St John.

Funeral ode for the Duchess Eberhardine (now known to be arranged from
portions of the lost Passion according to St Mark).

4 short masses (_i.e._ Kyrie and Gloria only) mainly compiled from church
cantatas.

Mass in B minor. Magnificat in D. A few other ecclesiastical Latin
choruses.

B. _Without Orchestra_

5 motets _a capella_ (but there is reason to believe that these, except
_Komm Jesu komm_, were intended to be partly supported by the organ). A
sixth motet has an obligato figured-bass accompaniment.

A few early choruses, mostly turned to account in later works.

A large collection of plain chorales, including several original melodies.

II.--SECULAR VOCAL MUSIC

_Der Streit zwischen Phoebus und Pan_ and _Der zufrieden gestellte Aeolus_;
both entitled _Dramma per Musica_, but showing no more essential connexion
with the stage than Handel's _Acis and Galatea_.

7 solo and 7 choral cantatas, of which latter three were almost entirely
absorbed into the Christmas oratorio and the B minor mass. Of the solo
cantatas two are Italian (one of these being Bach's only developed work for
voice and clavier) and two are burlesque.

Several tunes with clavier bass, almost foreshadowing the modern song.

III.--INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC

A. _Orchestral_

7 clavier concertos arranged from violin concertos and other sources.

3 concertos for two claviers (two being arranged from concertos for two
violins).

2 concertos for three claviers.

The 6 Brandenburg concertos, for various combinations.

2 violin concertos, and a colossal _torso_ of a concerted violin-movement
forming the prelude to a lost church cantata.

1 concerto for two violins.

4 orchestral suites. (The symphony in F in the same volume of the _B. G._
is only an earlier version of the first Brandenburg concerto.)

B. _Chamber Music_

3 sonatas for clavier and flute; a suite and 6 sonatas for clavier and
violin, 3 for clavier and viola da gamba; 2 trios with figured bass; 2
flute-sonatas and a violin suite with figured bass; 6 sonatas (_i.e._ 3
sonatas and 3 partitas) for violin alone; 6 suites for violoncello alone.

C. _Clavier and Organ Music_

Bach's own collections are:--

1. _Das wohltemperirte Klavier_ for clavichord: two books each containing
24 preludes and fugues, one in each major and minor key; with the object of
stimulating tuning by "equal temperament" instead of sacrificing the
euphony of remoter keys to that of the more usual ones.

2. _Klavier-Übung_ (chiefly for harpsichord) in four books comprising: (i.)
15 two-part inventions and 15 three-part symphonies, (ii.) 6 partitas,
(iii.) The "Goldberg" variations. 4 duets, and an important collection of
organ choral-preludes, with the "St Anne" prelude and fugue in E flat,
(iv.) The Italian concerto and French overture.

3. The 6 "French" and 6 "English" suites.

The other clavier works fill two _Jahrgänge_ of the _B.-G._

Bach's collections of organ music are (besides that included in the third
part of the _Klavier-Übung_):--(1) 6 sonatas. (2) 4 groups of 6 organ
preludes and fugues. (3) _Das Orgelbüchlein_, a collection of short
choral-preludes carefully planned--all the blank pages of the autograph
being headed with the titles of the chorales intended for them--but not
half executed. (The projected whole would have been a larger volume than
the _Wohltemperirtes Klavier_). (4) 18 larger chorale-preludes, including
Bach's last composition. (5) The 6 "Schübler" chorales, all arranged from
movements of cantatas.

Besides these there are the three great independent toccatas and the
Passacaglia. The remaining choral-preludes fill one _Jahrgang_, and the
other organ works two more.

D. _Unclassified_

Two important instrumental works cannot be classified, viz. _Das
musikalische Opfer_, the volume of compositions (two great fugues, various
puzzle-canons, and a splendid trio for flute, violin and figured bass) on
the theme given to Bach by Frederick the Great; and _Die Kunst der Fuge_, a
progressive series of fugues on one and the same subject, written in open
score as if entirely abstract studies, but all (except the extreme
contrapuntal _tours de force_) in admirable clavier style and of great
musical value.

IV.--LOST WORKS

A. _Choral_

J. N. Forkel's statement that Bach wrote 5 _Jahrgange_ of church cantatas
(_i.e._ enough to provide one for each Sunday and holy day for five years)
would indicate that some 80 are lost, but there is reason to believe that
this is a great exaggeration. Not more than six or seven cantatas are known
to be lost, by the evidence of fragments, text-books, &c.

Forkel also says that Bach wrote five Passions. Besides the great Matthew
and John Passions there is in an indisputable Bach autograph one according
to St Luke; but it is so worthless that the best plea for its authenticity
offered by responsible critics is that only a personal interest could have
induced Bach to make a copy of it.

[v.03 p.0130] The lost Passion according to St Mark must, judging by the
movements preserved in the _Trauer-Ode_, have been larger than that
according to St John.

Was there a _genuine_ Lucas-Passion? If so, Forkel's report of five
Passions would be explained. Several lost secular works are partly
preserved in those portions of the Christmas oratorio of which the sources
are not definitely known, but which, like the other duplicated numbers, are
fair copies in the autograph.

B. _Instrumental_

Three violin concertos and one for two violins; known only from the
wonderful clavier versions.

Most of the first movement of the A major sonata for clavier and flute
which was written in the spare staves at the bottom of a larger score. Some
of these have been cut off.

V.--ARRANGEMENTS OF WORKS BY OTHER COMPOSERS

Arrangements for harpsichord alone of 16 concertos, generally described as
by Vivaldi, but including several by other composers.

4 Vivaldi concertos arranged for organ.

Many of these arrangements contain much original matter, such as entirely
new slow movements, large cadenzas, &c.

Concerto in A minor for 4 claviers and orchestra, from Vivaldi's B minor
concerto for 4 violins. This, though the most faithful to its original, is
the richest and most Bach-like of all these arrangements, and is well worth
performing in public.

2 sonatas from the _Hortus Musicus_ of Reinken, arranged for clavier. (The
ends of the slow movements are Bach.)

Finishing touches to cantatas by his uncle Johann Ludwig Bach. Also a very
characteristic complete "Christe eleison" inserted in Kyrie of Johann
Ludwig's.

VI.--DOUBTFUL AND SPURIOUS WORKS

Bach's autographs give the name of the composer on the outside sheet only.
He was constantly making copies of all that interested him; and where the
outside sheet is lost, only the music itself can tell us whether it is his
or not. The above-mentioned _Passion according to St Luke_ is the chief
case in point. The little music-books he and his second wife wrote for
their children are full of pieces in the most various styles, and the
editors of the _Bach-Gesellschaft_ have not completely identified them,
even Couperin's well-known "Les Bergeries" escaping their scrutiny. A
sonata for two claviers by Bach's eldest son, Wilhelm Friedermann, was
detected by the editors after its inclusion in _Jahrgang_ xliv. The second
of the 3 sonatas for clavier and flute is extremely suggestive of Bach's
sons, but Philipp Emanuel ascribes it to his father. However, he might
easily have docketed it wrongly while arranging copies of his father's
works. It has a twin brother (_B.-G._ ix. Anhang ii.) for which he has not
vouched.

Four absurd church cantatas are printed for conscience' sake in _Jahrgang_
xliii. More important than these, because by no means too obviously
ridiculous to deceive a careless listener, is the well-known 8-part motet,
_Lob, Ehr' und Weisheit_ (blessing and glory and wisdom). A closer
acquaintance shows that it is really very poor stuff; and it was finally
crowned with absurdity by the discovery that its composer was a
contemporary of Bach,--and that his name was Wagner.

The beautiful motet, _Ich lasse dich nicht_, has long been known to be by
one of Bach's uncles (Johann Christoph).

EDITIONS

Almost the only works of Bach published during his lifetime were the
instrumental collections, most of which he engraved himself. Of the church
cantatas only one, _Gott ist mein König_ (written when he was nineteen, but
a very great work), was published in his lifetime.

Of modern editions that of the _Bach-Gesellschaft_ is, of course, the only
complete one. It is, inevitably, of very unequal merit. Its first editors
could not realize their own ignorance of Bach's language; their immediate
admiration of his larger choruses seemed to them proof of their competence
to retain or dismiss details of ornamentation, figured bass, variants
between score and parts, &c., without always stopping to see what light
these might shed on questions of _tempo_ and style--especially in the arias
and recitatives, which they regarded as archaic almost in direct proportion
to the depth of thought really displayed in them. In the 9th _Jahrgang_
Wilhelm Rust introduced scholarly methods, with the happiest results. The
_Wohltemperirtes Klavier (Jahrgang_ xiv.) was edited by Kroll, who also
made his text accessible in the _Edition Peters_ (which till then had only
Czerny's--an amazing result of corrupt tradition, still widely accepted).
Kroll's and Rust's volumes are far the best in the _B. G._ On Rust's death
the standard deteriorated; his immediate successor seems more interested in
reprinting in full an early version of a work of which Rust had given only
the variants, than in digesting his own materials (_Jahrgang_ xxix.); and
in his next volume (_Jahrgang_ xxx. p. 109) the bass and violin are a bar
apart for a whole line. The last ten volumes, however, are again
satisfactory, and in _Jahrgang_ xliv. the French and English suites are
re-edited. Part of the B minor mass was also worked over again; and Kroll's
text of the _Wohltemperirtes Klavier_ was supplemented by the evidence of
the British Museum autograph. The Steingräber edition of the clavier works,
edited by Dr Hans Bischoff, is incomparably the best, giving all the
variants in footnotes and clearly distinguishing the extremely intelligent
nuances and phrasing signs of the editor from the rare but significant
indications of Bach himself. Nor does this wealth of scholarship interfere
with the presentation of a straightforward, single text; though in addition
there is every necessary explanation of the ornaments and kindred matters.

We have seen no other editions that distinguish Bach's text from the
editor's taste--the disappointing publications of the _Neue
Bachgesellschaft_[4] by no means excepted. We may remark that the older
vocal scores of cantatas in the _Edition Peters_ are, though unfortunately
but a selection, far better than the complete series issued by Breitkopf
and Härtel in conformity with the _Bach Gesellschaft_, and therefore
accepted as authoritative (see INSTRUMENTATION). The English vocal scores
published by Novello are generally very good though covering but small
ground. The Novello score of the Christmas oratorio contains a fine
analytic preface by Sir George Macfarren.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--J. N. Forkel, _Über Bach's Leben, Kunst und Kunstwerke_,
translated (London, 1820); C. H. Bitter, _John Sebastian Bach_ (Berlin,
1865); Ernest David, _La Vie et les oeuvres de Bach_ (Paris, 1882); P.
Spitta, _Johann Sebastian Bach_ (Leipzig, 1873 and 1880); E. Heinrich,
_Sebastian Bach's Leben_ (Berlin, 1885); A. Pirro, _L'Esthétique de Jean
Sebastian Bach_ (Paris, 1907); and _L'Orgue de Jean Sebastian Bach_ (Paris,
1907); A. Schweitzer, _J. S. Bach: Le Musicien poète_. Spitta's biography
superseded everything written before it and has not since been approached.
With corrections in the light of Rust's _B. G._ prefaces it contains
everything worth knowing about Bach, except the music itself.

(D. F. T.)

[1] Spitta points out that this cannot mean singing in the choir at a
service, but making music in church privately.

[2] The same surgeon operated unsuccessfully on both composers.

[3] See the wild conjectures of the editor of the Four Short Masses as to
the "displacing" of structure in the _kyrie_ of the G minor Mass (_B.-G.,
Jahr. viii._ preface, with Rust's answer in the preface to _Jahr. xxiii._).

[4] The object of the _Neue Bachgesellschaft_ is to render the completed
results of the first _Bachgesellschaft_ generally accessible by holding
frequent Bach festivals and issuing cheap and practical editions. The
activities of this society, together with the new movement to restore
Bach's vocal music to its place in the Lutheran Church, cannot fail to have
a salutary effect on the future of music.

BACH, KARL PHILIPP EMANUEL (1714-1788), German musician and composer, the
third son of Johann Sebastian Bach, was born at Weimar on the 14th of March
1714. When he was ten years old he entered the Thomasschule at Leipzig, of
which in 1723 his father had become cantor, and continued his education as
a student of jurisprudence at the universities of Leipzig (1731) and of
Frankfort on the Oder (1735). In 1738 he took his degree, but at once
abandoned all prospects of a legal career and determined to devote himself
to music. A few months later he obtained an appointment in the service of
the crown prince of Prussia, on whose accession in 1740 he became a member
of the royal household. He was by this time one of the first
clavier-players in Europe, and his compositions, which date from 1731,
included about thirty sonatas and concerted pieces for his favourite
instrument. His reputation was established by the two sets of sonatas which
he dedicated respectively to Frederick the Great (1742) and to the grand
duke of Württemberg (1744); in 1746 he was promoted to the post of
_Kammermusikus_, and for twenty-two years shared with Karl Heinrich, Graun,
Johann Joachim, Quantz and Johann Gottlieb Naumann the continued favour of
the king. During his residence at Berlin he wrote a fine setting of the
_Magnificat_ (1749), in which he shows more traces than usual of his
father's influence, an Easter cantata (1756), several symphonies and
concerted works, at least three volumes of songs,--_Geistliche Oden und
Lieder_, to words by Gellert (1758), _Oden mit Melodien_ (1762) and
_Sing-Oden_ (1766), and a few secular cantatas and other _pièces
d'occasion_. But his main work was concentrated on the clavier, for which
he composed, at this time, nearly two hundred sonatas and other solos,
including the set _mit veränderten Reprisen_ (1760-1768) and a few of those
_für Kenner und Liebhaber_. Meanwhile he placed himself in the forefront of
European critics by his _Versuch über die wahre Art das Clavier zu spielen_
(first part 1753, second, with the first reprinted, 1762), a systematic and
masterly treatise which by 1780 had reached its third edition, and which
laid the foundation for the methods of Clementi and Cramer. In 1768 Bach
succeeded Georg Philipp Telemann as _Kapellmeister_ at Hamburg, and in
consequence of his new office began to turn his attention more towards
church music. Next year he produced his oratorio _Die Israeliten in der
Wüste_, a composition remarkable not only for its great beauty but for the
resemblance of its plan to that of Mendelssohn's _Elijah_, and between 1769
and 1788 added over twenty settings of the Passion, a second oratorio _Der
Auferstehung [v.03 p.0131] und Himmelfahrt Jesu_ (1777), and some seventy
cantatas, litanies, motets and other liturgical pieces. At the same time
his genius for instrumental composition was further stimulated by the
career of Haydn, to whom he sent a letter of high appreciation, and the
climax of his art was reached in the six volumes of sonatas _für Kenner und
Liebhaber_, to which he devoted the best work of his last ten years. He
died at Hamburg on the 14th of December 1788.

Through the latter half of the 18th century the reputation of K. P. E. Bach
stood very high. Mozart said of him, "He is the father, we are the
children"; the best part of Haydn's training was derived from a study of
his work; Beethoven expressed for his genius the most cordial admiration
and regard. This position he owes mainly to his clavier sonatas, which mark
an important epoch in the history of musical form. Lucid in style, delicate
and tender in expression, they are even more notable for the freedom and
variety of their structural design; they break away altogether from the
exact formal antithesis which, with the composers of the Italian school,
had hardened into a convention, and substitute the wider and more flexible
outline which the great Viennese masters showed to be capable of almost
infinite development. The content of his work, though full of invention,
lies within a somewhat narrow emotional range, but it is not less sincere
in thought than polished and felicitous in phrase. Again he was probably
the first composer of eminence who made free use of harmonic colour for its
own sake, apart from the movement of contrapuntal parts, and in this way
also he takes rank among the most important pioneers of the school of
Vienna. His name has now fallen into undue neglect, but no student of music
can afford to disregard his _Sonaten für Kenner und Liebhaber_, his
oratorio _Die Israeliten in der Wüste_, and the two concertos (in G major
and D major) which have been republished by Dr Hugo Riemann.

A list of his voluminous compositions may be found in Eitner's _Quellen
Lexikon_, and a critical account of them is given in Bitter's _C. P. E. und
W. F. Bach und deren Bruder_ (2 vols., Berlin, 1868), a mine of valuable
though ill-arranged information.

Four more of Johann Sebastian Bach's sons grew to manhood and became
musicians. The eldest of them, WILHELM FRIEDERMANN BACH (1710-1784) was by
common repute the most gifted; a famous organist, a famous improvisor and a
complete master of counterpoint. But, unlike the rest of the family, he was
a man of idle and dissolute habits, whose career was little more than a
series of wasted opportunities. Educated at Leipzig, he was appointed in
1733 organist of the Sophienkirche at Dresden, and in 1747 became musical
director of the Liebfrauenkirche at Halle. The latter office he was
compelled to resign in 1764, and thenceforward he led a wandering life
until, on the 1st of July 1784, he died in great poverty at Berlin. His
compositions, very few of which were printed, include many church cantatas
and instrumental works, of which the most notable are the fugues,
polonaises and fantasias for clavier, and an interesting sestet for
strings, clarinet and horns. Several of his manuscripts are preserved in
the Royal library at Berlin; and a complete list of his works, so far as
they are known, may be found in Eitner's _Quellen Lexikon_.

The fourth son, JOHANN GOTTFRIED BERNHARD BACH (1715-1739) was, like his
elder brothers, born at Weimar and educated at Leipzig. From 1735 to 1738
he held successively the organistships at Mühlhausen and Sangerhausen; in
1738 he threw up his appointment and went to study law at Jena; in 1739 he
died, aged 24.

JOHANN CHRISTOPH FRIEDRICH BACH (1732-1795), the ninth son, was born at
Leipzig, studied at the Thomasschule and the university, and in 1750 was
appointed _Kapellmeister_ at Bückeburg. He was an industrious composer,
especially of church-music and opera, whose work reflects no discredit on
the family name.

JOHANN CHRISTIAN BACH (1735-1782), the eleventh son, was born at Leipzig,
and on the death of his father in 1750 became the pupil of his brother
Emanuel at Berlin. In 1754 he went to Italy where he studied under Padre
Martini, and from 1760 to 1762 held the post of organist at Milan
cathedral, for which he wrote two Masses, a _Requiem_, a _Te Deum_ and
other works. Having also gained some reputation as a composer of opera, he
was in 1762 invited to London and there spent the rest of his life. For
twenty years he was the most popular musician in England, his dramatic
works, produced at the King's theatre, were received with great cordiality,
he was appointed music-master to the queen, and his concerts, given in
partnership with Abel at the Hanover Square rooms, soon became the most
fashionable of public entertainments. He is of some historical interest as
the first composer who preferred the pianoforte to the older
keyed-instruments; but his works, though elegant and pleasing, were
ephemeral in character and have been deservedly forgotten.

A full account of J. C. Bach's career is given in the fourth volume of
Burney's _History of Music_, and a catalogue of his compositions in an
article by Max Schwarz, published in the _Sammelbände_ of the
_Internationale Musik-Gesellschaft_, Jhrg. ii. p. 401.

(W. H. HA.)

BACHARACH, YAIR (1639-1702), German rabbi, was the author of _[H.]awwoth
Ya[=i]r_ (a collection of _Responsa_) and other works. Bacharach was a man
of wide culture, and holds an honourable place among the pioneers of the
Jewish Renaissance which was inaugurated towards the end of the 18th
century.

BACHARACH, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine Province, romantically
situated on the left bank of the Rhine, 30 m. above Coblenz on the railway
to Mainz. Pop. 2000. There is an interesting church, a basilica, dating
from the beginning of the 13th century. There are also ruins of a Gothic
church of the 13th and 15th centuries. The ruined castle of Stahleck,
crowning the heights above the town, is celebrated in history as the scene
of the marriage between Henry, eldest son of Henry the Lion (shortly before
the latter's death in 1195) and Agnes of Hohenstaufen, which effected a
temporary reconciliation between the houses of Welf and Hohenstaufen. Other
ruined castles are those of Fürstenberg and Stahlberg. All three belonged
to the counts palatine. The wines of Bacharach were once held in the
greatest esteem, and it is still one of the chief markets of the Rhenish
wine trade.

BACHAUMONT, LOUIS PETIT DE (1690-1771), French littérateur, was of noble
family and was brought up at the court of Versailles. He passed his whole
life in Paris as the centre of the _salon_ of Madame Doublet de Persan
(1677-1771), where criticism of art and literature took the form of
malicious gossip. A sort of register of news was kept in a journal of the
_salon_, which dealt largely in scandals and contained accounts of books
suppressed by the censor. Bachaumont's name is commonly connected with the
first volumes of this register, which was published anonymously under the
title _Mémoires secrets pour servir à l'histoire de la République des
Lettres_, but his exact share in the authorship is a matter of controversy.
It was continued by Pidansat de Mairobert (1707-1779) and others, until it
reached 36 volumes (1774-1779). It is of some value as a historical source,
especially for prohibited literature. Extracts were published by P. Lacroix
in one volume, 1859. An incomplete edition (4 vols.) was undertaken in 1830
by Ravenal.

See, in addition to the memoirs of the time, especially the _Correspondance
littéraire_ of Grimm, Diderot, d'Alembert and others (new ed., Paris, 1878,
17 vols.); Ch. Aubertin, _L'Esprit public au XVIII^e siècle_ (Paris, 1872).

BACHE, ALEXANDER DALLAS (1806-1867), American physicist, great-grandson of
Benjamin Franklin, was born at Philadelphia on the 19th of July 1806. After
graduating at the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1825, he
acted as assistant professor there for some time, and as a lieutenant in
the corps of engineers he was engaged for a year or two in the erection of
coast fortifications. He occupied the post of professor of natural
philosophy and chemistry in the University of Pennsylvania in 1828-1841 and
in 1842-1843. For the trustees of what in 1848 was to become Girard
College, but had not yet been opened, he spent the years 1836-1838 in
Europe, examining European systems of education, and on his return
published a very valuable report. In 1843, on the death of Professor F. R.
Hassler (1770-1843), he was appointed [v.03 p.0132] superintendent of the
United States coast survey. He succeeded in impressing Congress with a
sense of the great value of this work, and by means of the liberal aid it
granted, he carried out a singularly comprehensive plan with great ability
and most satisfactory results. By a skilful division of labour, and by the
erection of numerous observing stations, the mapping out of the whole coast
proceeded simultaneously under the eye of the general director, and in
addition a vast mass of magnetic and meteorological observations was
collected. He died at Newport, Rhode Island, on the 17th of February 1867.

BACHE, FRANCIS EDWARD (1833-1858), English musical composer, was born in
Birmingham on the 14th of September 1833. The pupil of Alfred Mellon for
violin and Sterndale Bennett for composition, he afterwards went to Leipzig
in 1853 and studied with Hauptmann and Plaidy. Considering the early age at
which he died, his compositions are fairly numerous, and the best, a trio
for piano and strings, is still held in high esteem. Two operettas, a piano
concerto and a number of published pianoforte pieces and songs do little
more than show how great was his promise. He died at Birmingham of
consumption on the 24th of August 1858. His younger brother, WALTER BACHE
(1842-1888), was born in Birmingham on the 19th of June 1842, and followed
him to the Leipzig Conservatorium, where he became an excellent pianist.
From 1862 to 1865 he studied with Liszt in Rome, and for many years devoted
himself to the task of winning popularity for his master's works in
England. At his annual concerts in London nearly all Liszt's larger works
were heard for the first time in England, and on the occasion of Liszt's
last visit to England in 1886, he was entertained by Bache at a memorable
reception at the Grosvenor Gallery. Walter Bache was professor of the
pianoforte at the Royal Academy of Music for some years before his death,
and the foundation of the Liszt scholarship at that institution was mainly
due to his efforts. He died in London on the 26th of March 1888.

An interesting memoir of the two brothers, by Miss Constance Bache,
appeared in 1901 under the title _Brother Musicians_.

BACHELOR (from Med. Lat. _baccalarius_, with its late and rare variant
_baccalaris_--cf. Ital. _baccalare_--through O. Fr. _bacheler_), in the
most general sense of the word, a young man. The word, however, as it
possesses several widely distinct applications, has passed through many
meanings, and its ultimate origin is still involved in a certain amount of
obscurity. The derivation from Welsh _bach_, little, is mentioned as
"possible" by Skeat (_Etymological Dictionary_), but is "definitely
discarded" by the _New English Dictionary_, and that given here is
suggested as probable. The word _baccalarius_ was applied to the tenant of
a _baccalaria_ (from _baccalia_, a herd of cows, _bacca_ being a Low Latin
variant of _vacca_), which was presumably at first a grazing farm and was
practically the same as a _vaselleria_, _i.e._ the fief of a sub-vassal.
Just, however, as the character and the size of the _baccalaria_ varied in
different ages, so the word _baccalarius_ changed its significance; thus in
the 8th century it was applied to the _rustici_, whether men or women
(_baccalariae_), who worked for the tenant of a _mansus_. Throughout all
its meanings the word has retained the idea of subordination suggested in
this origin. Thus it came to be applied to various categories of persons as
follows.--(1) Ecclesiastics of an inferior grade, _e.g._ young monks or
even recently appointed canons (Severtius, _de episcopis Lugdunensibus_, p.
377, in du Cange). (2) Those belonging to the lowest stage of knighthood.
Knights bachelors were either poor vassals who could not afford to take the
field under their own banner, or knights too young to support the
responsibility and dignity of knights bannerets (see KNIGHTHOOD AND
CHIVALRY). (3) Those holding the preliminary degree of a university,
enabling them to proceed to that of master (_magister_) which alone
entitled them to teach. In this sense the word _baccalarius_ or
_baccalaureus_ first appears at the university of Paris in the 13th century
in the system of degrees established under the auspices of Pope Gregory
IX., as applied to scholars still _in statu pupillari_. Thus there were two
classes of _baccalarii_: the _baccalarii cursores_, _i.e._ theological
candidates passed for admission to the divinity course, and the _baccalarii
dispositi_, who, having completed this course, were entitled to proceed to
the higher degrees. In modern universities the significance of the degree
of bachelor, in relation to the others, varies; _e.g._ at Oxford and
Cambridge the bachelor can proceed to his mastership by simply retaining
his name on the books and paying certain fees; at other universities a
further examination is still necessary. But in no case is the bachelor a
full member of the university. The degree of bachelor (of arts, &c.) is
borne by women also. (4) The younger or inferior members of a trade gild or
city company, otherwise known as "yeomen" (now obsolete). (5) Unmarried
men, since these presumably have their fortunes yet to make and are not
full citizens. The word bachelor, now confined to men in this connotation,
was formerly sometimes used of women also.

Bachelors, in the sense of unmarried men, have in many countries been
subjected to penal laws. At Sparta, citizens who remained unmarried after a
certain age suffered various penalties. They were not allowed to witness
the gymnastic exercises of the maidens; and during winter they were
compelled to march naked round the market-place, singing a song composed
against themselves and expressing the justice of their punishment. The
usual respect of the young to the old was not paid to bachelors (Plut.
_Lyc._ 15). At Athens there was no definite legislation on this matter; but
certain minor laws are evidently dictated by a spirit akin to the Spartan
doctrine (see Schömann, _Gr. Alterth._ i. 548). At Rome, though there
appear traces of some earlier legislation in the matter, the first clearly
known law is that called the Lex Julia, passed about 18 B.C. It does not
appear to have ever come into full operation; and in A.D. 9 it was
incorporated with the Lex Papia et Poppaea, the two laws being frequently
cited as one, Lex Julia et Papia Poppaea. This law, while restricting
marriages between the several classes of the people, laid heavy penalties
on unmarried persons, gave certain privileges to those citizens who had
several children, and finally imposed lighter penalties on married persons
who were childless. Isolated instances of such penalties occur during the
middle ages, _e.g._ by a charter of liberties granted by Matilda I.,
countess of Nevers, to Auxerre in 1223, an annual tax of five _solidi_ is
imposed on any man _qui non habet uxorem et est bachelarius_. In Britain
there has been no direct legislation bearing on bachelors; but,
occasionally, taxes have been made to bear more heavily on them than on
others. Instances of this are the act (6 and 7 Will. III.) passed in 1695;
the tax on servants, 1785; and the income tax, 1798.

BACHIAN (Dutch _Batjan_), one of the Molucca Islands, in the residency of
Ternate, Dutch East Indies, in the Molucca Sea, in 0°13'-0°55' S. and
127°22'-128° E. With its subordinate islands, Mandioli, Tawali and others,
it lies west of the southern peninsula of the island of Halmahera or
Jilolo, and has an area of 914 sq. m. It is of irregular form, consisting
of two distinct mountainous parts, united by a low isthmus, which a slight
subsidence would submerge. The island is in part of volcanic formation, and
the existence of hot springs points to volcanic activity. There are,
however, especially in the southern portion, ancient and non-volcanic
rocks. The highest elevation occurs at the south of the island, the
mountain of Labua reaching 6950 ft. Coal and other minerals have been
discovered. A large portion of the island is richly wooded, and sago,
cocoa-nuts and cloves (which are indigenous) are abundantly produced.
Bachian is remarkable as the most eastern point on the globe inhabited by
any of the _Quadrumana_, a black ape occurring here as in Celebes. The
island is very rich in birds and insects. The interior of the island is
uninhabited and none of the dwellers on the coast are indigenous. They
consist of the Sirani or Christian descendants of the Portuguese, of
Malays, with a Papuan element, Galela men from the north of Halmahera,
immigrants from Celebes, with some Chinese and Arabs. The total number of
inhabitants is about 13,000. The chief village, called Amasing by the
inhabitants, but also called Bachian, is situated on the west side of the
isthmus. Bachian is the most important island of a group formerly governed
by a sultan, but since 1889 by a committee of chiefs under the control of a
Dutch _contrôleur_. From 1882 onwards a Batjan company attempted to exploit
the island, but [v.03 p.0133] unsuccessfully, owing to a deficient
knowledge of the soil and its capabilities and a lack of labourers.

BACK-BOND, or BACK-LETTER, in Scots law, a deed qualifying the terms of
another deed, or declaratory of the purposes for which another deed has
been granted. Thus an _ex facie_ absolute disposition, qualified by a
back-bond expressing the limited nature of the right actually held by the
person to whom the disposition is made, would constitute what in England is
termed a deed of trust.

BACK-CHOIR, RETRO-CHOIR, a space behind the high altar in the choir of a
church, in which there is, or was, a small altar standing back to back with
the other.

BACKERGUNJE, or BAKARGANJ, a district of British India in the Dacca
division of Eastern Bengal and Assam. It forms part of the joint delta of
the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, and its area is 4542 sq. m. The general
aspect of the district is that of a flat even country, dotted with clusters
of bamboos and betel-nut trees, and intersected by a perfect network of
dark-coloured and sluggish streams. There is not a hill or hillock in the
whole district, but it derives a certain picturesque beauty from its wide
expanses of cultivation, and the greenness and freshness of the vegetation.
This is especially conspicuous in the rains, but at no time of the year
does the district present a dried or burnt-up appearance. The villages,
which are always walled round by groves of bamboos and betel-nut palms,
have often a very striking appearance; and Backergunje has many beauties of
detail which strike a traveller in passing through the country. The level
of the country is low, forming as it does a part of the great Gangetic
delta; and the rivers, streams and water-courses are so numerous that it is
very difficult to travel except by boat at any season of the year. Every
natural hollow is full of water, around the margin of which long grasses,
reeds and other aquatic plants grow in the greatest profusion, often making
it difficult to say where the land ends and the water begins. Towards the
north-west the country is very marshy and nothing is to be seen for miles
but tracts of unreclaimed swamps and rice lands, with a few huts scattered
here and there and raised on mounds of earth. In the south of the district,
along the coast of the Bay of Bengal, lie the forest tracts of the
Sundarbans, the habitation of tigers, leopards and other wild beasts.

The principal rivers of the district are the Meghna, the Arial Khan and the
Haringhata or Baleswar, with their numerous offshoots. The Meghna
represents the accumulated waters of the Brahmaputra and Ganges. It flows
along the eastern boundary of the district in a southerly direction for
about 100 m. till it debouches into the Bay of Bengal. During the latter
part of its course this noble river expands into a large estuary containing
many islands, the principal of which is that of Dakshin Shahbazpur. The
islands on the sea-front are exposed to devastation by cyclonic
storm-waves. The Arial Khan, a branch of the Ganges, enters the district
from the north, and flows generally in a south-easterly direction till it
falls into the estuary of the Meghna. The main channel of the Arial Khan is
about 1700 yds. in width in the dry season, and from 2000 to 3000 yds. in
the rains. It receives a number of tributaries, sends off several
offshoots, and is navigable throughout the year by native cargo boats of
the largest size. The Haringhata, Baleswar, Madhumati and Garai are various
local names for the same river in different parts of its course and
represent another great offshoot of the Ganges. It enters Backergunje near
the north-west corner of the district, whence it forms its western
boundary, and runs south, but with great windings in its upper reaches,
till it crosses the Sundarbans, and finally falls into the Bay of Bengal by
a large and deep estuary, capable of receiving ships of considerable
burden. In the whole of its course through the district the river is
navigable by native boats of large tonnage, and by large sea-going ships as
high up as Morrellganj, in the neighbouring district of Jessore. Among its
many tributaries in Backergunje the most important is the Kacha, itself a
considerable stream and navigable by large boats all the year round, which
flows in a southerly direction for 20 m., when it falls into the Baleswar.
Other rivers of minor importance are the Barisal, Bishkhali, Nihalganj,
Khairabad, Ghagar, Kumar, &c. All the rivers in the district are subject to
tidal action from the Meghna on the north, and from the Bay of Bengal on
the south, and nearly all of them are navigable at high tide by country
boats of all sizes. The rise of the tide is very considerable in the
estuary of the Meghna, and many of the creeks and water-courses in the
island of Dakshin Shahbazpur, which are almost dry at ebb tide, contain 18
or 19 ft. of water at the flood. A very strong "bore" or tidal wave runs up
the estuary of the Meghna at spring tides, and a singular sound like
thunder, known as the "Barisal guns," is often heard far out at sea about
the time it is coming in. There are numerous marshes in the district, of
great size and depth, and abounding in fish.

The Mussulmans of Backergunje are among the worst of their creed, steeped
in ignorance and prejudice, easily excited to violence and murder, very
litigious and grossly immoral. On account of an epidemic of murders
disarmament had to be enforced in the district. The Faraizis or Puritan
sect of Mahommedans are exceedingly numerous in the district. The Buddhist
population consists of Maghs or the people of Arakan, who first settled in
Backergunje about 1800, and have made themselves very useful in the
clearing of the Sundarbans. A gipsy-like tribe called the Bebajias are
rather numerous in this district. They live principally in boats,
travelling from place to place, profess Mahommedanism, and gain their
subsistence by wood-cutting in the Sundarbans, fishing, fortune-telling and
trading in trinkets. In 1901 the population was 2,291,752, showing an
increase of 6% in the decade.

A number of small trading villages exist throughout the district, and each
locality has its periodical fairs for purposes of traffic. The material
condition of the people is good. Every inhabitant is a small landholder and
cultivates sufficient rice and other necessaries for the support of his
family. Owing to this reason, hired labour is very scarce. Rice is the
great crop of the district, and three harvests are obtained annually--the
_aman_, or winter rice; _aus_, or autumn crop; and _boro_, or spring rice.
The climate of Backergunje is one of the healthiest in Eastern Bengal,
owing to the strong south-west monsoon, which comes up directly from the
Bay of Bengal, and keeps the atmosphere cool; but the heavy rainfall and
consequent humidity of the atmosphere, combined with the use of bad water,
are fruitful sources of disease. The average annual temperature varies from
78° to 85° F. The thermometer ranges from 62° to 98°.

Barisal, the headquarters station, situated on the west bank of the Barisal
river, had a population in 1901 of 18,978. The next largest town is
Pirojpur (14,119).

BACKGAMMON, a game played with draughtsmen and a special board, depending
on the throw of dice. It is said to have been invented about the 10th
century (Strutt). A similar game (_Ludus duodecim scriptorum_, the
"twelve-line game") was known to the Romans, and Plato (_Republic_, bk. x.)
alludes to a game in which dice were thrown and men were placed after due
consideration. The etymology of the word "backgammon" is disputed; it is
probably Saxon--_baec_, back, _gamen_, game; _i.e._ a game in which the
players are liable to be sent back. Other derivations are, Dan. _bakke_,
tray, _gammen_, game (Wedgwood); and Welsh _bach_, little, _cammaun_,
battle (Henry). Chaucer alludes to a game of "tables," played with three
dice, in which "men" were moved from the opponent's "tables," the game
(_ludus Anglicorum_) being described in the Harleian MSS. (1527). The
French name for backgammon is _trictrac_, imitative of the rattle of the
dice.

Backgammon is played by two persons. The "board" (see diagram) is divided
into four "tables," each table being marked with six "points" coloured
differently. The inner and outer tables are separated from each other by a
projecting _bar_. The board (in the ordinary form of the game) is furnished
with fifteen white and fifteen black men, "set" or arranged as in the
diagram. It is usual to make the inner table the one nearest to the light.
Two dice-boxes are required, one for each player, and a pair of dice, which
are used by both players. The dice are marked with numbers on their six
sides, from one to six, number one being called, "ace"; two, "deuce":
three, "trey." Formerly the [v.03 p.0134] four was called "quatre"
(pronounced "cater"); the five, "cinque" (pronounced either "sank" or
"sink"); and the six, "six" (size).

For the right to start each player throws one or two dice; the one who
throws the higher number has the right of playing first; and he may either
adopt the numbers thrown or he may throw again, using both dice.

[Illustration]

The men are moved on from point to point, according to the throws of the
dice made by the players alternately. White moves from black's inner table
to black's outer, and from this to white's outer table, and so on to
white's inner table; and all black's moves must be in the contrary
direction. A player may move any of his men a number of points
corresponding to the numbers thrown by him, provided the point to which the
move would bring him is not _blocked_ by two or more of his adversary's men
being on it. The whole throw may be taken with one man, or two men maybe
moved, one the exact number of points on one die, the other the number on
the other die. If doublets are thrown (_e.g._ two sixes), four moves of
that number (_e.g._ four moves of six points) may be made, either all by
one man or separately by more. Thus, suppose white throws five, six, he may
move one of his men from the left-hand corner of the black's inner table to
the left-hand corner of black's outer table for six; he may, again, move
the same man five points farther on, when his move is completed; or he may
move any other man five points. But white cannot move a man for five from
the black's ace-point, because the six-point in that table is blocked. Any
part of the throw which cannot be moved is of no effect, but it is
compulsory for a player to move the whole throw unless blocked. Thus if the
men were differently placed, and white could move a six, and having done so
could not move a five, his move is completed. If, however, by moving the
five first, he can afterwards move a six, he must make the move in that
manner.

When a player so moves as to place two men on the same point, he is said to
"make a point."

When there is only a single man on a point, it is called a "blot." When a
blot is left, the man there may be taken up (technically the blot may be
"hit") by the adversary if he throws a number which will enable him to
place a man on that point. The man hit is placed on the bar, and has to
begin again by entering the adversary's home table again at the next throw
should it result in a number that corresponds to an unblocked point. The
points in the home tables count for this purpose as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
beginning from the ace-point. A player is not allowed to move any other man
while he has one to enter. It is, therefore, an advantage to have made all
the points in your own board, so that your adversary, if you take a man up,
cannot enter; and you can then continue throwing until a point is opened.

The game proceeds until one of the players gets all his men into his inner
table or _home_. Then he begins to take his men off the board, or to _bear_
them, _i.e._ to remove a man from any point that corresponds in number with
his throw. If such a point is unoccupied, a move must be made, if there is
room for it, and a move may be taken, instead of bearing a man, at any
time; but when six is empty, if six is thrown a man may be borne from five
and so on. If, after a player has commenced throwing off his men, he should
be hit on a blot, he must enter on his adversary's inner table and must
bring the man taken up into his own inner table before he can bear further.

Whoever first takes off all his men wins the game:--a single game (a "hit")
if his adversary has begun bearing; a double game (a "gammon") if the
adversary has not borne a man; and a triple game (a "backgammon") if, at
the time the winner bears his last man, his adversary, not having borne a
man, has one in the winner's inner table, or has a man up. When a series of
games is played, the winner of a hit has the first throw in the succeeding
game; but if a gammon is won, the players each throw a single die to
determine the first move of the next game.

In order to play backgammon well, it is necessary to know all the chances
on two dice and to apply them in various ways. The number of different
throws that can be made is thirty-six. By taking all the combinations of
these throws which include given numbers, it is easily discovered where
blots may be left with the least probability of being hit. For example, to
find the chance of being hit where a blot can only be taken up by an ace,
the adversary may throw two aces, or ace in combination with any other
number up to six, and he may throw each of these in two different ways, so
that there are in all eleven ways in which an ace may be thrown. This,
deducted from thirty-six (the total number of throws), leaves twenty-five;
so that it is 25 to 11 against being hit on an ace. It is very important to
bear in mind the chance of being hit on any number. The following table
gives the odds against being hit on any number within the reach of one or
two dice: -

  It is 25 to 11, or about 9 to 4, against being hit on 1
     "  24 "  12,    or    2 "  1,           "          2
     "  22 "  14, or about 3 "  2,           "          3
     "  21 "  15,    or    7 "  5,           "          4
     "  21 "  15,    "     7 "  5,           "          5
     "  19 "  17,    "    9½ "  8½,          "          6
     "  30 "   6,    "     5 "  1,           "          7
     "  30 "   6,    "     5 "  1,           "          8
     "  31 "   5, or about 6 "  1,           "          9
     "  33 "   3,    or   11 "  1,           "         10
     "  34 "   2,    "    17 "  1,           "         11
     "  33 "   3,    "    11 "  1,           "         12

The table shows that if a blot must be left within the reach of one die,
the nearer it is left to the adversary's man the less probability there is
of its being hit. Also, that it is long odds against being hit on a blot
which is only to be reached with double dice, and that, in that case (on
any number from 7 to 11), the farther off the blot is, the less chance
there is of its being hit.

The table assumes that the board is open for every possible throw. If part
of the throw is blocked by an intervening point being held by adverse men,
the chance of being hit is less.

Two principles, then, have to be considered in moving the men:-- (1) To
make points where there is the best chance of obstructing the opponent. (2)
When obliged to leave blots, to choose the position in which they are least
likely to be hit.

The best points to secure are the five-point in your own inner table and
the five-point in your adversary's inner table. The next best is your own
bar-point; and the next best the four in your own inner table.

The best move for some throws at the commencement of a game is as
follows:--Aces (the best of all throws), move two on your bar-point and two
on your five-point. This throw is often given to inferior players by way of
odds.

Ace, trey: make the five-point in your inner table.

Ace, six: make your bar-point.

Deuces: move two on the four-point in your inner table, and two on the
trey-point in your opponent's inner table.

Deuce, four: make the four-point in your own table.

Threes: play two on the five-point in your inner table, and two on the
four-point of your adversary's inner table, or make your bar-point.

Trey, five: make the trey-point in your own table.

Trey, six: bring a man from your adversary's ace-point as far as he will
go.

Fours: move on two on the five-point in your adversary's inner table, and
two from the five in his outer table.

Four, five and four, six: carry a man from your adversary's ace-point as
far as he will go.

Fives: move two men from the five in your adversary's outer table to the
trey-point in your inner table.

Five, six: move a man from your adversary's ace-point as far as he will go.

Sixes (the second-best throw): move two on your adversary's bar-point and
two on your own bar-point.

In carrying the men home carry the most distant man to your adversary's
bar-point, to the six-point in your outer table, and then to the six-point
in your inner table. By following this rule as nearly [v.03 p.0135] as the
throws admit, you will carry the men to your inner table in the fewest
number of throws.

Avoid carrying many men upon the trey or deuce-point in your own tables, as
these men are out of play.

Whenever you have taken up two of your adversary's men, and two or more
points made in your inner table, spread your other men in the hope of
making another point in your tables, and of hitting the man your adversary
enters.

Always take up a man if the blot you leave in making the move can only be
hit with double dice, but if you already have two of your opponent's men in
your tables it is unwise to take up a third.

In entering a man which it is to your adversary's advantage to hit, leave
the blot upon the lowest point you can, _e.g._ ace-point in preference to
deuce-point.

When your adversary is bearing his men, and you have two men in his table,
say, on his ace-point, and several men in the outer table, it is to your
advantage to leave one man on the ace-point, because it prevents his
bearing his men to the greatest advantage, and gives you the chance of his
leaving a blot. But if you find that you can probably save the gammon by
bringing both your men out of his table, do not wait for a blot. Eight
points is the average throw.

The laws of backgammon (as given by Hoyle) are as follows:--

1. When a man is touched by the caster it must be played if possible; if
impossible no penalty. 2. A man is not played till it is placed upon a
point and quitted. 3. If a player omits a man from the board there is no
penalty. 4. If he bears any number of men before he has entered a man taken
up, men so borne must be entered again. 5. If he has mistaken his throw and
played it, and his adversary has thrown, it is not in the choice of either
of the players to alter it, unless they both agree to do so. 6. If one or
both dice are "cocked," _i.e._ do not lie fairly and squarely on the table,
a fresh throw is imperative.

_Russian Backgammon_ varies from the above game in that the men, instead of
being set as in the diagram, are entered in the same table by throws of the
dice, and both players move in the same direction round to the opposite
table. There are various rules for this game. By some a player is not
obliged to enter all his men before he moves any; he can take up blots at
any time on entering, but while he has a man up, he must enter it before
entering any more or moving any of those already entered. If he cannot
enter the man that is up, he loses the benefit of the throw.

A player who throws doublets must play or enter not only the number thrown,
but also doublets of the number corresponding to the opposite side of the
dice; thus, if he throws sixes, he must first enter or move the sixes, as
the case may be, and then aces, and he also has another throw. Some rules
allow him to play either doublets first, but he must always complete one
set before playing the other. If a player cannot play the whole of his
throw, his adversary is sometimes allowed to play the unplayed portion, in
which cases the caster is sometimes allowed to come in and complete his
moves, if he can, and in the event of his having thrown deuce-ace or
doublets to throw again. If he throws doublets a second time, he moves and
throws again, and so on. The privilege is sometimes restricted by not
allowing this advantage to the first doublets thrown by each player. It is
sometimes extended by allowing the thrower of the deuce-ace to choose any
doublets he likes on the opposite side of the dice, and to throw again. The
restriction with regard to the first doublets thrown does not apply to
deuce-ace, nor does throwing it remove the restriction with regard to first
doublets. A player must first be able to complete the doublets thrown. If
the player cannot move the whole throw he cannot take the corresponding
doublets, and he is not allowed another throw if he cannot move all the
points to which he is entitled.

BACKHUYSEN, or BAKHUISEN, LUDOLF (1631-1708), Dutch painter, was born at
Emden, in Hanover. He was brought up as a merchant at Amsterdam, but early
discovered so strong a genius for painting that he relinquished business
and devoted himself to art. He studied first under Allart van Everdingen
and then under Hendrik Dubbels, two eminent masters of the time, and soon
became celebrated for his sea-pieces. He was an ardent student of nature,
and frequently exposed himself on the sea in an open boat in order to study
the effects of tempests. His compositions, which are very numerous, are
nearly all variations of one subject, and in a style peculiarly his own,
marked by intense realism or faithful imitation of nature. In his later
years Backhuysen employed his time in etching and calligraphy. He died in
Amsterdam on the 17th of November 1708.

BACKNANG, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Württemberg, 19 m. by rail
N.E. from Stuttgart. Pop. (1900) 7650. It has an interesting church, dating
from the 12th century, and notable tanneries and leather factories, woollen
and cloth mills. In 1325 Backnang was ceded to Württemberg by Baden. In the
vicinity is the Wilhelmsheim sanatorium for consumptives.

BACKSCRATCHER, a long slender rod of wood, whalebone, tortoiseshell, horn
or cane, with a carved human hand, usually of ivory, mounted at the
extremity. Its name suggests the primary use of the implement, but little
is known of its history, and it was unquestionably also employed as a kind
of rake to keep in order the huge "heads" of powdered hair worn by ladies
during a considerable portion of the 18th and the early part of the 19th
centuries. The backscratcher varies in length from 12 to 20 in., and the
more elaborate examples, which were occasionally hung from the waist, are
silver-mounted, and in rare instances the ivory fingers bear carved rings.
The hand is sometimes outstretched, and sometimes the fingers are flexed;
the modelling is frequently good, the fingers delicately formed and the
nails well defined. As a rule the rod is finished off with a knob. The hand
was now and again replaced by a rake or a bird's claw. The hand was
indifferently dexter or sinister, but the Chinese variety usually bears a
right hand. Like most of the obsolete appliances of daily life, the
backscratcher, or scratch-back, as it is sometimes called, has become
scarce, and it is one of the innumerable objects which attract the
attention of the modern collector.

BACK'S RIVER (_Thlewechodyeth_, or "Great Fish"), a river in Mackenzie and
Keewatin districts, Canada, rising in Sussex lake, a small body of water in
108° 20' W. and 64° 25' N., and flowing with a very tortuous course N.E. to
an inlet of the Arctic Ocean, passing through several large
lake-expansions--Pelly, Carry, MacDougall and Franklin. Like the
Coppermine, the only other large river of this part of Canada, it is
rendered unnavigable by a succession of rapids and rocks. It was discovered
and explored by Sir George Back in 1834. Its total length is 560 m.

BACKWARDATION, or, as it is more often called for brevity, BACK, a
technical term employed on the London Stock Exchange to express the amount
charged for the loan of stock from one account to the other, and paid to
the purchaser by the seller on a bear account (see ACCOUNT) in order to
allow the seller to defer the delivery of the stock. The seller, having
sold for delivery on a certain date, stocks or shares which probably he
does not possess, in the hope that he may be able, before the day fixed for
delivery, to buy them at a cheaper price and so earn a profit, finds on
settling-day that the prices have not gone down according to his
expectation, and therefore pays the purchaser an agreed amount of interest
(_backwardation_) for the privilege of deferring the delivery, either in
order to procure the stock, or else in the hope that there will be a
shrinkage in the price which will enable him to gain a profit. (See also
STOCK EXCHANGE).