BACON, FRANCIS (BARON VERULAM, VISCOUNT ST ALBANS) (1561-1626), English
philosopher, statesman and essayist, was born at York House in the Strand,
London, on the 22nd of January 1560/1. He was the youngest son of Sir
Nicholas Bacon (_q.v._). His mother, the second wife of Sir Nicholas, was a
daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke, formerly tutor to Edward VI. She was a woman
of considerable culture, well skilled in the classical studies of the
period, and a warm adherent of the Reformed or Puritan Church. Very little
is known of Bacon's early life and education. His health being then, as
always, extremely delicate, he probably received much of his instruction at
home. In April 1573 he was entered at Trinity College, Cambridge, where for
three years he resided with his brother Anthony. At Cambridge he applied
himself diligently to the several sciences as then taught, and came to the
conclusion that the methods employed and the results attained were alike
erroneous. Although he preserved a reverence for Aristotle (of whom,
however, he seems to have known but little), he learned to despise the
current Aristotelian philosophy. It yielded no fruit, was serviceable only
for disputation, and the end it proposed to itself was a mistaken one.
Philosophy must be taught its true purpose, and for this purpose a new
method must be devised. With the [v.03 p.0136] first germs of this great
conception in his mind, Bacon left the university.

On the 27th of June 1576 he and his brother Anthony were entered _de
societate magistrorum_ at Gray's Inn, and a few months later he was sent
abroad with Sir Amyas Paulet, the English ambassador at Paris. The
disturbed state of government and society in France at that time afforded
him valuable political instruction. It was formerly supposed that certain
_Notes on the State of Christendom_, usually printed in his works, contain
the results of his observations, but Spedding has shown that there is no
reason for ascribing these _Notes_ to him, and that they may be attributed
with more probability to one of his brother Anthony's correspondents.

The sudden death of his father in February 1578/9 necessitated Bacon's
return to England, and exercised a very serious influence on his fortunes.
A considerable sum of money had been laid up by Sir Nicholas for the
purchase of an estate for his youngest son, the only one otherwise
unprovided for. Owing to his sudden death, this intention was not carried
out, and a fifth only of the money descended to Francis. This was one of
the gravest misfortunes of his life; he started with insufficient means,
acquired a habit of borrowing and was never afterwards out of debt. As it
had become necessary that he should adopt some profession, he selected that
of law, and took up his residence at Gray's Inn in 1579.

In the fragment _De Interpretation Naturae Prooemium_ (written probably
about 1603) Bacon analyses his own mental character and lays before us the
objects he had in view when he entered on public life. If his opening
sentence, "Ego cum me ad utilitates humanas natum existimarem" ("since I
thought myself born to be of advantage to mankind"), seems at first sight a
little arrogant, it must be remembered that it is the arrogance of
Aristotle's [Greek: megalopsuchos],[1] who thinks himself worthy of great
things, and is worthy. The ideal of production of good to the human race
through the discovery of truth, was combined in him with the practical
desire to be of service to his country. He purposed, therefore, to obtain,
if possible, some honourable post in the state which would give him the
means of realizing these projects, and would enable him to do somewhat for
the church, the third of the objects whose good he had at heart. The
constant striving after these three ends is the key to Bacon's life. His
qualifications for accomplishing the task were not small. His intellect was
far-seeing and acute, quick and yet cautious, meditative, methodical and
free from prejudice. If we add to this account that he seems to have been
of an unusually amiable disposition we have a fairly complete picture of
his mental character at this critical period of his life.

In 1580 he appears to have taken the first step in his career by applying,
through his uncle, Burghley, the lord treasurer, for some post at court.
His suit, though well received by the queen, was unsuccessful; the
particulars are totally unknown. For two years after this disappointment he
worked quietly at Gray's Inn, and in 1582 was admitted an outer barrister.
In 1584 he took his seat in parliament for Melcombe in Dorsetshire, but the
notes for the session do not disclose what reputation he gained. About the
same time he made another application to Burghley, apparently with a view
to expediting his progress at the bar. His uncle, who appears to have
"taken his zeal for ambition," wrote him a severe letter, taking him to
task for arrogance and pride, qualities which Bacon vehemently disclaimed.
As his advancement at the bar was unusually rapid, his uncle's influence
may have been exerted in his behalf. In 1589 he received the first
substantial piece of patronage from his powerful kinsman, the reversion of
the clerkship of the Star Chamber. The office was worth about £1600 a year;
but it did not become vacant for nearly twenty years. A considerable period
of his life thus slipped away, and his affairs had not prospered. He had
written on the condition of parties in the church; he had set down his
thoughts on philosophical reform in the lost tract, _Temporis Partus
Maximus_; but he had failed in obtaining the position which he looked upon
as an indispensable condition of success. A long and eloquent letter to
Burghley[2] throws additional light upon his character, and gives a hint as
to the cause of his uncle's slackness in promoting him.

Some time before this, perhaps as early as 1588, Bacon appears to have
become acquainted with the earl of Essex, Elizabeth's favourite. At the
close of 1591 he was acting as the earl's confidential adviser, and exerted
himself, together with his brother Anthony, diligently in the earl's
service. In February 1593 parliament was called, and Bacon took his seat
for Middlesex. The special occasion for which the House had been summoned
was the discovery of one of the numerous popish plots that distracted
Elizabeth's reign.

As Bacon's conduct in this emergency seriously affected his fortunes and
has been much misunderstood, it is necessary to state, as briefly as
possible, the whole facts of the case. The House having been duly informed
of the state necessities, assented to a double subsidy and appointed a
committee to draw up the requisite articles. Before this was completed, a
message arrived from the House of Lords requesting a conference, which was
granted. The committee of the Commons were then informed that the crisis
demanded a triple subsidy to be collected in a shorter time than usual,
that the Lords could not assent to less than this, and that they desired to
confer on the matter. This proposal of the Lords to discuss supply
infringed upon the privileges of the Commons; accordingly, when the report
of committee was read to the Lower House, Bacon spoke against the proposed
conference, pointing out at the same time that a communication from the
Lords might be received, but that the actual deliberation on it must be
taken by themselves alone. His motion, after some delay, was carried and
the conference was rejected. The Lords upon this lowered their demands, and
desired merely to make a communication, which, being legitimate, was at
once assented to. The House had then before them the proposal for a triple
subsidy, to be collected in three, or, as the motion ultimately was shaped,
in four years, instead of in six, as the ordinary custom would have been.
Bacon, who approved of the increased subsidy, was opposed to the short
period in which it was proposed to raise it. He suggested that it would be
difficult or impossible for the people to meet such heavy demands, that
discontent and trouble would arise, and that the better method of procedure
was to raise money by levy or imposition. His motion appears to have
received no support, and the four years' subsidy was passed unanimously.
Bacon, as it turned out, had been mistaken in thinking that the country
would be unable to meet the increased taxation, and his conduct, though
prompted by a pure desire to be of service to the queen, gave deep and
well-nigh ineradicable offence. He was accused [v.03 p.0137] of seeking
popularity, and was for a time excluded from the court. His letter to
Burghley,[3] who had told him of the queen's displeasure with his speech,
offers no apology for what he had said, but expresses regret that his
motives should have been misunderstood. He soon felt that the queen's anger
was not to be appeased by such a justification. The attorney-generalship
had fallen vacant and Bacon became a candidate for the office, his most
formidable rival being his life-long antagonist, Edward Coke, who was then
solicitor. Essex warmly espoused Bacon's cause and earnestly pressed his
claims upon the queen; but his impetuous, pettish pleading tended to retard
the cause. Burghley, on the other hand, in no way promoted his nephew's
interest; he would recommend him for the solicitorship, but not for the
attorney-generalship; and it is not improbable that Sir Robert Cecil
secretly used his influence against his cousin. The queen delayed the
appointment, and Bacon's fortunes, as they then stood, could ill brook
delay. He was harassed with debt and at times so disheartened that he
contemplated retirement from public life. In March 1594 it was at last
understood that Coke was to be attorney-general. Essex, though bitterly
mortified, at once threw all his energies into the endeavour to procure for
Bacon the solicitorship; but in this case also, his method of dealing,
which was wholly opposed to Bacon's advice,[4] seemed to irritate the
queen. The old offence was not yet forgiven, and after a tedious delay, the
office was given, in October 1595, to Serjeant Thomas Fleming. Burghley and
Sir John Puckering seem to have assisted Bacon honestly, if not
over-warmly, in this second application; but the conduct of Cecil had
roused suspicions which were not perhaps without foundation. Essex, to
compensate in some degree for Bacon's disappointment, insisted on
presenting him with a piece of land, worth about £1800, and situated
probably near Twickenham Park. Nor did his kindness cease there; before
sailing on the expedition to Cadiz, in the beginning of 1596, he addressed
letters to Buckhurst, Fortescue and Egerton, earnestly requesting them to
use their influence towards procuring for Bacon the vacant office of master
of the rolls. Before anything came of this application, the Cadiz
expedition had resulted in a brilliant success, and Essex became the idol
of the army and the people. Bacon saw clearly that such a reputation would
assuredly alienate the affections of the queen, who loved not to have a
subject too powerful or too popular. He therefore addressed an eloquent and
imploring letter to the earl, pointing out the dangers of his position and
urging upon him what he judged to be the only safe course of action, to
seek and secure the favour of the queen alone; above all things dissuading
him from the appearance of military popularity. His advice, however, was
unpalatable and proved ineffectual. The earl still continued his usual
course of dealing with the queen, depending solely upon her supposed
affection for him, and insanely jealous of any other whom she might seem to
favour. His unskilful and unlucky management of the sea expedition to
Ferrol and the Azores in no way lowered his popularity with the people, but
undoubtedly weakened his influence with the queen.

Bacon's affairs in the meantime had not been prospering. He had increased
his reputation by the publication in 1597 of his _Essays_, along with which
were the _Colours of Good and Evil_ and the _Meditationes Sacrae_; but his
private fortunes were in a bad condition. No public office apparently could
be found for him; a scheme for retrieving his position by a marriage with
the wealthy widow, Lady Elizabeth Hatton, failed, and in 1598 he was
arrested for debt. He seems, however, to have been growing in favour with
the queen. Some years previously (perhaps about 1594), he had begun to be
employed by her in crown affairs, and he gradually acquired the standing of
one of the learned counsel, though he had no commission or warrant, and
received no salary. At the same time he was no longer on the former
friendly terms with Essex, a certain estrangement having sprung up between
them, caused no doubt by the earl's dislike of his friend's advice. The
earl's affairs were then at a somewhat critical stage, and as our judgment
upon a most important episode in Bacon's life depends upon our knowledge of
the events of the ensuing year, it will be requisite to enter somewhat
minutely into proceedings with which Bacon himself had nothing to do.

Ireland was then in a rebellious and discontented condition, and it was
difficult for the English government to decide either on a definite course
of policy with regard to it, or on a leader by whom that policy might be
carried out. A violent quarrel took place between the queen and Essex, who
for some months retired from court and refused to be reconciled. At last he
came forth from his seclusion, and it was soon understood that he was in
person to undertake the subjugation of the rebels in Ireland, with a larger
force than had ever before been sent into that country. Into the obscure
details of this unhappy campaign it is unnecessary to enter; one fact
stands out clearly, that Essex endeavoured to carry out a treasonable
design. His jealousy and ill-temper had been so roused that the only course
open to him seemed to be the obtaining a powerful military force, the
possession of which would compel the queen to reinstate him in her favour.
Whether or not this plan was in contemplation before he undertook the Irish
expedition is not evident, though even outsiders at that time entertained
some suspicions, but there can be no doubt of the treasonable character of
the negotiations carried on in Ireland. His plans, probably not very
definite, were disturbed by an imperative message from the queen, ordering
him not to return to England without her permission. He at once set off,
and, trusting apparently to her affection for him, presented himself
suddenly before her. He was, for the moment, received kindly, but was soon
afterwards ordered to keep his chamber, and was then given into the custody
of the lord keeper at York House, where he remained till March 1600. His
great popularity, and the general ignorance of the reasons for his
imprisonment, stirred up a strong feeling against the queen, who was
reported to be influenced by Bacon, and such indignation was raised against
the latter that his friends feared his life would be in danger. It was at
last felt necessary that the queen should in some way vindicate her
proceedings, and this she at first did, contrary to Bacon's advice, by a
declaration from the Star Chamber. This, however, gave little or no
satisfaction, and it was found expedient to do what Bacon had always
recommended, to have a fair trial, yet not one in which the sentence must
needs be damaging to the earl. The trial accordingly took place before a
body of her majesty's councillors, and Bacon had a subordinate and
unimportant part in the accusation. Essex does not seem to have been at all
hurt by his action in this matter, and shortly after his release they were
again on friendly terms, Bacon drawing up letters as if to or from the earl
with the design of having them brought before the queen. But Bacon did not
know the true character of the transactions in which Essex had been
engaged. The latter had been released from all custody in August, but in
the meantime he had been busily engaged in treasonable correspondence with
James of Scotland, and was counting on the Irish army under his ally,
Charles Blount, Baron Mountjoy (afterwards earl of Devonshire), the new
deputy. But Mountjoy had apparently come to see how useless the attempt
would be to force upon the queen a settlement of the succession and
declined to go farther in the matter. Essex was thus thrown upon his own
resources, and his anger against the queen being roused afresh by the
refusal to renew his monopoly of sweet wines, he formed the desperate
project of seizing her person and compelling her to dismiss from her
council his enemies Raleigh, Cobham, and Cecil. As some pretext, he
intended to affirm that his life was in danger from these men, who were in
league with the Spaniards. The plot was forced on prematurely by the
suspicions excited at court, and the rash attempt to rouse the city of
London (8th of February 1601), proved a complete _fiasco_. The leaders were
arrested that night and thrown into prison. Although the actual rising
might have appeared a mere outburst of frantic passion, the private
examinations of the most prominent [v.03 p.0138] conspirators disclosed to
the government a plot so widely spread, and involving so many of the
highest in the land, that it would have been perilous to have pressed home
accusations against all who might be implicated. Essex was tried along with
the young earl of Southampton, and Bacon, as one of her majesty's counsel,
was present on the occasion. Coke, who was principal spokesman, managed the
case with great want of skill, incessantly allowing the thread of the
evidence to escape, and giving the prisoners opportunity to indulge in
irrelevant justifications and protestations which were not ineffectual in
distracting attention from the real question at issue. On the first
opportunity Bacon rose and briefly pointed out that the earl's plea of
having done nothing save what was absolutely necessary to defend his life
from the machinations of his enemies was weak and worthless, inasmuch as
these enemies were purely imaginary; and he compared his case to that of
Peisistratus, who had made use of a somewhat similar stratagem to cloak his
real designs upon the city of Athens. He was thereupon interrupted by the
earl, who proceeded to defend himself, by declaring that in one of the
letters drawn up by Bacon, and purporting to be from the earl to Anthony
Bacon, the existence of these rumours, and the dangers to be apprehended
from them, had been admitted; and he continued, "If these reasons were then
just and true, not counterfeit, how can it be that now my pretences are
false and injurious?" To this Bacon replied, that "the letters, if they
were there, would not blush to be seen for anything contained in them, and
that he had spent more time in vain in studying how to make the earl a good
servant to the queen than he had done in any thing else." It seems to be
forgotten in the general accounts of this matter, not only that Bacon's
letters bear out what he said, but that the earl's excuses were false. A
second time Bacon was compelled to interfere in the course of the trial,
and to recall to the minds of those present the real question at issue. He
animadverted strongly upon the puerile nature of the defence, and in answer
to a remark by Essex, that if he had wished to stir up a rebellion he would
have had a larger company with him, pointed out that his dependence was
upon the people of London, and compared his attempt to that of the duke of
Guise at Paris. To this the earl made little or no reply. Bacon's use of
this illustration and of the former one of Peisistratus, has been much
commented on, and in general it seems to have been thought that had it not
been for his speeches Essex might have escaped, or, at all events, have
been afterwards pardoned. But this view of the matter depends on the
supposition that Essex was guilty only of a rash outbreak.[5] That this was
not the case was well known to the queen and her council. Unfortunately,
prudential motives hindered the publication of the whole evidence; the
people, consequently, were still ignorant of the magnitude of the crime,
and, till recently, biographers of Bacon have been in a like ignorance.[6]
The earl himself, before execution, confessed his guilt and the thorough
justice of his sentence, while, with singular lack of magnanimity, he
incriminated several against whom accusations had not been brought, among
others his sister Lady Rich. After his execution it was thought necessary
that some account of the facts should be drawn up and circulated, in order
to remove the prejudice against the queen's action in the matter. This was
entrusted to Bacon, who drew up a _Declaration of the Practices and
Treasons attempted and committed by Robert, late Earl of Essex_, his first
draft being extensively altered and corrected by the queen and council.
Nothing is known with certainty of the reception given to this official
explanation, but the ill-feeling against Bacon was not wholly removed, and
some years later, in 1604, he published, in the form of a letter to
Mountjoy, an _Apology_ for his action in the case. This _Apology_ gives a
most fair and temperate history of the relations between Bacon and Essex,
shows how the prudent counsel of the one had been rejected by the other,
and brings out very clearly what we conceive to be the true explanation of
the matter. Everything that Bacon could do was done by him, until the real
nature of Essex's design was made apparent, and then, as he had repeatedly
told the earl, his devotion and respect were for the queen and state, not
for any subject; friendship could never take rank above loyalty. Those who
blame Bacon must acquit Essex of all wrong-doing.

Bacon's private fortunes, during the period after the death of Essex, were
not in a flourishing condition. He had obtained a grant of £1200 from the
fines imposed on Catesby, one of the conspirators, but his debts were
sufficient to swallow up this and much more. And, though he was trusted by
Elizabeth, and on good terms with her, he seems to have seen that he had no
chance of advancement. But her death in 1603, followed by the undisputed
succession of James, gave him new hopes. He used every means in his power
to bring himself under James's notice, writing to all his friends at the
Scottish court and to the king himself. He managed to obtain a personal
interview with the king, but does not seem to have been much satisfied with
it. In fact, while the king confirmed in their situations those who had
held crown offices under Elizabeth, Bacon, not holding his post by warrant,
was practically omitted. He was, however, continued, by special order of
the king, as learned counsel extraordinary, but little or no law business
appears to have been entrusted to him. He procured, through his cousin
Cecil, the dignity of knighthood, which, contrary to his inclination, he
received along with about 300 others, on the 23rd of July 1603. Between
this time and the opening of James's first parliament he was engaged in
literary work, and sent to the king two pamphlets--one on the Union, the
other on measures for the pacification of the church. Shortly after he
published his _Apology_. In March 1604 parliament met, and during their
short session Bacon's hands seem to have been full of work. It was a busy
and stirring time, and events occurred during it which carried within them
the seeds of much future dissension. Prerogative and privilege came more
than once into collision, the abuses of purveyance and wardship were made
matters of conference, though the thorough discussion of them was deferred
to a succeeding session; while James's temper was irritated by the
objections brought against his favourite scheme of the Union, and by the
attitude taken up by the House with regard to religious affairs. The
records are barely full enough to enable us to judge of the share taken by
Bacon in these discussions; his name generally appears as the reporter of
the committees on special subjects. We can occasionally, however, discern
traces of his tact and remarkable prudence; and, on the whole, his
attitude, particularly with regard to the Union question, recommended him
to James. He was shortly afterwards formally installed as learned counsel,
receiving the salary of £40, and at the same time a pension of £60 yearly.
He was also appointed one of the commission to treat of the conditions
necessary for the Union; and the admirable manner in which the duties of
that body were discharged must be attributed mainly to his influence and
his complete mastery of the subject. During the recess he published his
_Advancement of Learning_, dedicated to the king.

He was now brought into relations with James, and his prospects began to
improve. It is important for us to know what were his ideas upon
government, upon parliaments, prerogative, and so forth, since a knowledge
of this will clear up much that would seem inexplicable in his life. It
seems quite evident[7] that Bacon, from position, early training and, one
might almost think, natural inclination, held as his ideal of government
the Elizabethan system. The king was the supreme power, the centre of law
and justice, and his prerogative must not be infringed. Parliament was
merely a body called to consult with the king on emergencies (_circa ardua
regni_) and to grant supplies. King and parliament together make up the
state, but the former is first in nature and importance. The duty of a
statesman was, therefore, to carry out the royal will in as prudent a
manner as possible; he was the servant of the king, and stood or fell
according to his pleasure. He was not singular in his opinions and he was
undoubtedly sincere; and it is only [v.03 p.0139] by keeping them
constantly in mind that we can understand his after relations with the
king.

In the second parliament there was not so much scope for the exercise of
his powers. The Gunpowder Plot had aroused in the Commons warmer feelings
towards the king; they passed severe laws against recusants, and granted a
triple subsidy. At the same time they continued the collection of the
grievances concerning which they were to move. In the course of this
session Bacon married Alice Barnham "the alderman's daughter, an handsome
maiden, to my liking," of whom he had written some years before to his
cousin Cecil. Little or nothing is known of their married life.

The third parliament was chiefly occupied with the commercial and legal
questions rising out of the proposed Union, in particular, with the dispute
as to the naturalization of the _Post Nati_. Bacon argued ably in favour of
this measure, but the general feeling was against it. The House would only
pass a bill abolishing hostile laws between the kingdoms; but the case of
the _Post Nati_, being brought before the law courts, was settled as the
king wished. Bacon's services were rewarded in June 1607 by the office of
solicitor.[8] Several years passed before he gained another step. Meantime,
though circumstances had thrown him too much into active life, he had not
forgotten his cherished project of reorganizing natural science. A survey
of the ground had been made in the _Advancement_, and some short pieces not
published at the time were probably written in the subsequent two or three
years. Towards the close of 1607 he sent to his friends a small tract,
entitled _Cogitata et Visa_, probably the first draft of what we have under
that title. In 1609 he wrote the noble panegyric, _In felicem memoriam
Elizabethae_, and the curiously learned and ingenious work, _De Sapientia
Veterum_; and completed what seems to have been the _Redargutio
Philosophiarum_, or treatise on the "idols of the theatre."

In 1610 the famous fourth parliament of James met. Prerogative, despite
Bacon's advice and efforts, clashed more than once with liberty;
Salisbury's bold schemes for relieving the embarrassment caused by the
reckless extravagance of the king proved abortive, and the House was
dissolved in February 1611. Bacon took a considerable share in the debates,
consistently upheld the prerogative, and seemed yet to possess the
confidence of the Commons. The death of Salisbury, occurring soon after,
opened a position in which Bacon thought his great political skill and
sagacity might be made more immediately available for the king's service.
How far he directly offered himself for the post of secretary is uncertain,
but we know that his hopes were disappointed, the king himself undertaking
the duties of the office. About the same time he made two ineffectual
applications for the mastership of the wards; the first, on Salisbury's
death, when it was given to Sir George Carey; the second, on the death of
Carey. It is somewhat hard to understand why so little favour was shown by
the king to one who had proved himself able and willing to do good service,
and who, in spite of his disappointments, still continued zealously to
offer advice and assistance. At last in 1613, a fair opportunity for
promotion occurred. The death of Sir Thomas Fleming made a vacancy in the
chief justiceship of the king's bench, and Bacon, after some deliberation,
proposed to the king that Coke should be removed from his place in the
court of common pleas and transferred to the king's bench. He gives several
reasons for this in his letter to the king, but in all probability his
chief motive was that pointed out by Spedding, that in the court of king's
bench there would be less danger of Coke coming into collision with the
king on questions of prerogative, in handling which Bacon was always very
circumspect and tender. The vacancy caused by Coke's promotion was then
filled up by Hobart, and Bacon, finally, stepped into the place of
attorney-general. The fact of this advice being offered and followed in all
essentials, illustrates very clearly the close relations between the king
and Bacon, who had become a confidential adviser on most occasions of
difficulty. That his adherence to the royal party was already noticed and
commented on appears from the significant remark of Chamberlain, who, after
mentioning the recent changes among the law officials, says, "There is a
strong apprehension that ... Bacon may prove a dangerous instrument."

Further light is thrown upon Bacon's relations with James, and upon his
political sympathies, by the letter to the king advocating the calling of a
parliament,[9] and by the two papers of notes on which his letter was
founded.[10] These documents, even after due weight is given to all
considerations urged in their favour,[11] seem to confirm the view already
taken of Bacon's theory of government, and at the same time show that his
sympathies with the royal party tended to blind him to the true character
of certain courses of action, which can only be justified by a straining of
political ethics. The advice he offered, in all sincerity, was most prudent
and sagacious, and _might_ have been successfully carried out by a man of
Bacon's tact and skill; but it was intensely one-sided, and exhibited a
curious want of appreciation of what was even then beginning to be looked
on as the true relation of king, parliament and people. Unfortunately for
James, he could neither adopt nor carry out Bacon's policy. The parliament
which met in April 1614, in which Bacon sat for Cambridge University, and
was dissolved in June, after a stormy session, was by no means in a frame
of mind suitable for the king's purposes. The House was enraged at the
supposed project (then much misunderstood) of the "Undertakers"; objection
was taken to Bacon being elected or serving as a member while holding
office as attorney-general; and, though an exception was made in his
favour, it was resolved that no attorney-general should in future be
eligible for a seat in parliament. No supply was granted, and the king's
necessities were increased instead of diminished. The emergency suggested
to some of the bishops the idea of a voluntary contribution, which was
eagerly taken up by the noblemen and crown officials. The scheme was
afterwards extended so as to take in the whole kingdom, but lost something
of its voluntary character, and the means taken to raise the money, which
were not what Bacon would have recommended,[12] were calculated to stir up
discontent. The general dissatisfaction received a somewhat unguarded and
intemperate expression in a letter sent to the justices of Marlborough by a
gentleman of the neighbourhood, named Oliver St John,[13] in which he
denounced the attempt to raise funds in this way as contrary to law, reason
and religion, as constituting in the king personally an act of perjury,
involving in the same crime those who contributed, and thereby subjecting
all parties to the curses levelled by the church at such offences. St John
was summoned before the Star Chamber for slander and treasonable language;
and Bacon, _ex officio_, acted as public prosecutor. The sentence
pronounced (a fine of £5000 and imprisonment for life) was severe, but it
was not actually inflicted, and probably was not intended to be carried
out, the success of the prosecution being all that was desired. St John
remained a short time in prison, and was then released, after making a full
apology and submission. The fine was remitted. It seems incredible that
Bacon's conduct on this occasion should have been censured by his
biographers. The offence was clear; the law was undoubted; no particular
sympathy was excited for the culprit; the sentence was not carried out; and
Bacon did only what any one in his place would naturally and necessarily
have done. The nature of his office involved him in several trials for
treason occurring about the same time, and one of these is of interest
sufficient to require a somewhat longer examination. Edmund Peacham[14] had
been [v.03 p.0140] committed to custody for a libel on his superior, James
Montagu (1568?-1618), bishop of Bath and Wells. In searching his house for
certain papers, the officers came upon some loose sheets stitched together
in the form of a sermon, the contents of which were of such a nature that
it was judged right to lay them before the council. As it was at first
suspected that the writing of this book had been prompted by some
disaffected persons, Peacham was interrogated, and after he had declined to
give any information, was subjected to torture. Bacon, as one of the
learned counsel, was ordered by the council to take part in this
examination, which was undoubtedly warranted by precedent, whatever may now
be thought of it. Nothing, however, was extracted from Peacham in this way,
and it was resolved to proceed against him for treason. Now, in the excited
state of popular feeling at that period, the failure of government to
substantiate an accusation of treason would have been a serious matter. The
king, with whom the council agreed, seems therefore to have thought it
desirable to obtain beforehand the opinions of the four chief judges as to
whether the alleged offence amounted to treason. In this there was nothing
unusual or illegal, and no objection would at that time have been made to
it, but James introduced a certain innovation; he proposed that the
opinions of the four judges should be given separately and in private. It
may be reasonably inferred that his motive for this was the suspicion, or
it may be the knowledge, that Coke did not consider the matter treasonable.
At all events when Coke, who as a councillor already knew the facts of the
case, was consulted regarding the new proposal of the king, he at once
objected to it, saying that "this particular and auricular taking of
opinions" was "new and dangerous," and "not according to the custom of the
realm." He at last reluctantly assented, and proposed that Bacon should
consult with him, while the other law officers addressed themselves to the
three puisne judges. By Bacon's directions the proposal to the three judges
to give their opinions separately was made suddenly and confidently, and
any scruples they might have felt were easily overcome. The first step was
thus gained, and it was hoped that if "infusion" could be avoided, if the
papers bearing on the case were presented to the judges quickly, and before
their minds could be swayed by extraneous influence, their decision on the
case would be the same as that of the king. It is clear that the extraneous
influence to be feared was Coke, who, on being addressed by Bacon, again
objected to giving his opinion separately, and even seemed to hope that his
brother judges after they had seen the papers would withdraw their assent
to giving their decisions privately. Even after the discussion of the case
with Bacon, he would not give his opinion until the others had handed in
theirs. What the other judges thought is not definitely known, but Bacon
appears to have been unable to put in operation the plan he had devised for
swaying Coke's judgment,[15] or if he did attempt it, he was unsuccessful,
for Coke finally gave an opinion consistent with what he seems to have held
at first, that the book was not treasonable, as it did not disable the
king's title. Although the opinions of the judges were not made public, yet
as we learn, not only from Bacon, but from a sentence in one of Carleton's
letters,[16] a rumour had got about that there was doubt as to the book
being treasonable. Under these circumstances, Bacon, who feared that such a
report might incite other people to attempt a similar offence, proposed to
the king that a second rumour should be circulated in order to destroy the
impression caused by the first. "I do think it necessary," he says, "that
because we live in an age in which no counsel is kept, and that it is true
there is some bruit abroad that the judges of the king's bench do doubt of
the case that it should not be treason, that it be given out constantly,
and yet as it were in secret, and so a fame to slide, that the doubt was
only upon the publication, in that it was never published. For that (if
your majesty marketh it) taketh away or at least qualifieth the danger of
the example; for that will be no man's case."[17] Bacon's conduct in this
matter has been curiously misrepresented. He has been accused of torturing
the prisoner, and of tampering with the judges[18] by consulting them
before the trial; nay, he is even represented as selecting this poor
clergyman to serve for an example to terrify the disaffected, as breaking
into his study and finding there a sermon never intended to be preached,
which merely encouraged the people to resist tyranny.[19] All this lavish
condemnation rests on a complete misconception of the case. If any blame
attaches to him, it must arise either from his endeavour to force Coke to a
favourable decision, in which he was in all probability prompted by a
feeling, not uncommon with him, that a matter of state policy was in danger
of being sacrificed to some senseless legal quibble or precedent, or from
his advice to the king that a rumour should be set afloat which was not
strictly true.

Bacon's share in another great trial which came on shortly afterwards, the
Overbury and Somerset case, is not of such a nature as to render it
necessary to enter upon it in detail.[20] It may be noted, however, that
his letters about this time show that he had become acquainted with the
king's new favourite, the brilliant Sir George Villiers, and that he stood
high in the king's good graces. In the early part of 1616, when Thomas
Egerton, Baron Ellesmere (_c._ 1540-1617), the lord chancellor, was
dangerously ill, Bacon wrote a long and careful letter to the king,
proposing himself for the office, should it fall vacant, and stating as
frankly as possible of what value he considered his services would be. In
answer, he appears to have received a distinct promise of the reversion of
the office; but, as Ellesmere recovered, the matter stood over for a time.
He proposed, however, that he should be made a privy councillor, in order
to give him more weight in his almost recognized position of adviser to the
king, and on the 9th of June 1616 he took the oaths and his seat at the
council board.

Meanwhile, his great rival Coke, whose constant tendency to limit the
prerogative by law and precedent had made him an object of particular
dislike to James, had on two points come into open collision with the
king's rights. The first case was an action of _praemunire_ against the
court of chancery, evidently instigated by him, but brought at the instance
of certain parties whose adversaries had obtained redress in the
chancellor's court after the cause had been tried in the court of king's
bench. With all his learning and ingenuity Coke failed in inducing or even
forcing the jury to bring in a bill against the court of chancery, and it
seems fairly certain that on the technical point of law involved he was
wrong. Although his motive was, in great measure, a feeling of personal
dislike towards Ellesmere, yet it is not improbable that he was influenced
by the desire to restrict in every possible way the jurisdiction of a court
which was the direct exponent of the king's wishes. The other case, that of
the _commendams_, was more important in itself and in the circumstances
connected with it. The general question involved in a special instance was
whether or not the king's prerogative included the right of granting at
pleasure livings _in commendam_, _i.e._ to be enjoyed by one who was not
the incumbent. Bacon, as attorney-general, delivered a speech, which has
not been reported; but the king was informed that the arguments on the
other side had not been limited to the special case, but had directly
impugned the general prerogative right of granting livings. It was
necessary for James, as a party interested, at once to take measures to see
that the decision of the judges should not be given on the general question
without due consultation. He accordingly wrote to Bacon, directing him to
intimate to the judges his pleasure that they should delay judgment until
after discussion of the matter with himself. Bacon communicated first with
Coke, who in reply desired that similar notice should be given to the other
judges. This was done by Bacon, though he seems to hint that in so doing he
was [v.03 p.0141] going a little beyond his instructions. The judges took
no notice of the intimation, proceeded at once to give judgment, and sent a
letter in their united names to the king announcing what they had done, and
declaring that it was contrary to law and to their oath for them to pay any
attention to a request that their decision should be delayed. The king was
indignant at this encroachment, and acting partly on the advice of Bacon,
held a council on the 6th of June 1616, at which the judges attended. James
then entered at great length into the case, censuring the judges for the
offensive form of their letter, and for not having delayed judgment upon
his demand, which had been made solely because he was himself a party
concerned. The judges, at the conclusion of his speech, fell on their
knees, and implored pardon for the manner of their letter; but Coke
attempted to justify the matter contained in it, saying that the delay
required by his majesty was contrary to law. The point of law was argued by
Bacon, and decided by the chancellor in favour of the king, who put the
question to the judges individually, "Whether, if at any time, in a case
depending before the judges, which his majesty conceived to concern him
either in power or profit, and thereupon required to consult with them, and
that they should stay proceedings in the meantime, they ought not to stay
accordingly?" To this all gave assent except Coke, who said that "when the
case should be, he would do that should be fit for a judge to do." No
notice was taken by the king of this famous, though somewhat evasive,
reply, But the judges were again asked what course they would take in the
special case now before them. They all declared that they would not decide
the matter upon general grounds affecting the prerogative, but upon special
circumstances incident to the case; and with this answer they were
dismissed. Bacon's conduct throughout the affair has been blamed, but
apparently on wrong grounds. As attorney he was merely fulfilling his duty
in obeying the command of the king; and in laying down the law on the
disputed point, he was, we may be sure, speaking his own convictions.
Censure might more reasonably be bestowed on him because he deliberately
advised a course of action than which nothing can be conceived better
calculated to strengthen the hands of an absolute monarch.[21] This
appeared to Bacon justifiable and right, because the prerogative would be
defended and preserved intact. Coke certainly stands out in a better light,
not so much for his answer, which was rather indefinite, and the force of
which is much weakened by his assent to the second question of the king,
but for the general spirit of resistance to encroachment exhibited by him.
He was undeniably troublesome to the king, and it is no matter for wonder
that James resolved to remove him from a position where he could do so much
harm. On the 26th June he was called before the council to answer certain
charges, one of which was his conduct in the _praemunire_ question. He
acknowledged his error on that head, and made little defence. On the 30th
he was suspended from council and bench, and ordered to employ his leisure
in revising certain obnoxious opinions in his reports. He did not perform
the task to the king's satisfaction, and a few months later he was
dismissed from office.

Bacon's services to the king's cause had been most important; and as he
had, at the same time, acquired great favour with Villiers, his prospects
looked brighter than before. According to his custom, he strove earnestly
to guide by his advice the conduct of the young favourite. His letters, in
which he analyses the various relations in which such a man must stand, and
prescribes the course of action suitable for each, are valuable and
deserving of attention.[22] Very striking, in view of future events, are
the words[23] in which he gives him counsel as to his dealing with judges:
"By no means be you persuaded to interpose yourself by word or letter in
any cause depending, or like to be depending, in any court of justice, nor
suffer any man to do it where you can hinder it; and by all means dissuade
the king himself from it, upon the importunity of any, either for their
friends or themselves. If it should prevail, it perverts justice; but if
the judge be so just, and of so undaunted a courage (as he ought to be) as
not to be inclined thereby, yet it always leaves a taint of suspicions and
prejudice behind it." It is probable that Villiers at this time had really
a sense of the duties attaching to his position[24] and was willing to be
guided by a man of approved wisdom. It was not long before an opportunity
occurred for showing his gratitude and favour. Ellesmere resigned the
chancellorship on the 5th of March 1616/7, and on the 7th the great seal
was bestowed upon Bacon, with the title of lord keeper. Two months later he
took his seat with great pomp in the chancery court, and delivered a
weighty and impressive opening discourse. He entered with great vigour on
his new labours, and in less than a month he was able to report to
Buckingham that he had cleared off all outstanding chancery cases. He
seemed now to have reached the height of his ambition; he was the first law
officer in the kingdom, the accredited minister of his sovereign, and on
the best terms with the king and his favourite. His course seemed perfectly
prosperous and secure, when a slight storm arising opened his eyes to the
frailty of the tenure by which he held his position.

Coke was in disgrace but not in despair; there seemed to be a way whereby
he could reconcile himself to Buckingham, through the marriage of his
daughter, who had an ample fortune, to Sir John Villiers, brother of the
marquess, who was penniless or nearly so. The match was distasteful to Lady
Hatton and to her daughter; a violent quarrel was the consequence, and
Bacon, who thought the proposed marriage most unsuitable, took Lady
Hatton's part. His reasons for disapproval he explained to the king and
Buckingham, but found to his surprise that their indignation was strongly
roused against him. He received from both bitter letters of reproof; it was
rumoured that he would be disgraced, and Buckingham was said to have
compared his present conduct to his previous unfaithfulness to Essex.
Bacon, who seems to have acted from a simple desire to do the best for
Buckingham's own interests, at once changed his course, advanced the match
by every means in his power, and by a humble apology appeased the
indignation that had been excited against him. It had been a sharp lesson,
but things seemed to go on smoothly after it, and Bacon's affairs
prospered.

On the 4th of January 1617/8 he received the higher title of lord
chancellor; in July of the same year he was made Baron Verulam and in
January 1620/1 he was created Viscount St Albans. His fame, too, had been
increased by the publication in 1620 of his most celebrated work, the
_Novum Organum_. He seemed at length to have made satisfactory progress
towards the realization of his cherished aims; the method essential for his
Instauration was partially completed; and he had attained as high a rank in
the state as he had ever contemplated. But his actions in that position
were not calculated to promote the good of his country.

Connected with the years during which he held office is one of the
weightiest charges against his character. Buckingham, notwithstanding the
advice he had received from Bacon himself, was in the habit of addressing
letters to him recommending the causes of suitors. In many cases these seem
nothing more than letters of courtesy, and, from the general tone, it might
fairly be concluded that there was no intention to sway the opinion of the
judge illegally, and that Bacon did not understand the letters in that
sense. This view is supported by consideration of the few answers to them
which are extant.[25] One outstanding case, however, that of Dr
Steward,[26] casts some suspicion on all the others. The terms of
Buckingham's note[27] concerning it might easily have aroused doubts; and
we find that the further course of the action was to all appearances
exactly accommodated to Dr Steward, who [v.03 p.0142] had been so strongly
recommended. It is, of course, dangerous to form an extreme judgment on an
isolated and partially understood case, of which also we have no
explanation from Bacon himself, but if the interpretation advanced by Heath
be the true one, Bacon certainly suffered his first, and, so far as we can
see, just judgment on the case to be set aside, and the whole matter to be
reopened in obedience to a request from Buckingham.

It is somewhat hard to understand Bacon's position with regard to the king
during these years. He was the first officer of the crown, the most able
man in the kingdom, prudent, sagacious and devoted to the royal party. Yet
his advice was followed only when it chimed in with James's own will; his
influence was of a merely secondary kind; and his great practical skill was
employed simply in carrying out the measures of the king in the best mode
possible. We know indeed that he sympathized cordially with the home policy
of the government; he had no objection to such monopolies or patents as
seemed advantageous to the country, and for this he is certainly not to be
blamed.[28] The opinion was common at the time, and the error was merely
ignorance of the true principles of political economy. But we know also
that the patents were so numerous as to be oppressive, and we can scarcely
avoid inferring that Bacon more readily saw the advantages to the
government than the disadvantages to the people. In November 1620, when a
new parliament was summoned to meet on January following, he earnestly
pressed that the most obnoxious patents, those of alehouses and inns, and
the monopoly of gold and silver thread, should be given up, and wrote to
Buckingham, whose brothers were interested, advising him to withdraw them
from the impending storm. This prudent advice was unfortunately rejected.
But while he went cordially with the king in domestic affairs, he was not
quite in harmony with him on questions of foreign policy. Not only was he
personally in favour of a war with Spain for the recovery of the
Palatinate, but he foresaw in such a course of action the means of drawing
together more closely the king and his parliament. He believed that the
royal difficulties would be removed if a policy were adopted with which the
people could heartily sympathize, and if the king placed himself at the
head of his parliament and led them on. But his advice was neglected by the
vacillating and peace-loving monarch, his proffered proclamation was put
aside, and a weak, featureless production substituted in its place.
Nevertheless the new parliament seemed at first more responsive than might
have been looked for. A double subsidy was granted, which was expressly
stated to be "not on any consideration or condition for or concerning the
Palatinate." The session, however, was not far advanced when the question
of patents was brought up; a determined attack was made upon the very ones
of which Bacon had been in dread, and it was even proposed to proceed
against the referees (Bacon and Montagu) who had certified that there was
no objection to them in point of law. This proposal, though pressed by
Coke, was allowed to drop; while the king and Buckingham, acting under the
advice of Williams, afterwards lord keeper, agreed to give up the
monopolies. It was evident, however, that a determined attack was about to
be made upon Bacon, and that the proceeding against the referees was really
directed against him. It is probable that this charge was dropped because a
more powerful weapon had in the meantime been placed in his enemies' hands.
This was the accusation of bribery and corrupt dealings in chancery suits,
an accusation apparently wholly unexpected by Bacon, and the possibility of
which he seems never to have contemplated until it was actually brought
against him. At the beginning of the session a committee had been appointed
for inquiring into abuses in the courts of justice. Some illegal practices
of certain chancery officials had been detected and punished by the court
itself, and generally there was a disposition to overhaul its affairs,
while Coke and Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex (1575-1645) directly
attacked some parts of the chancellor's administration. But on the 14th of
March one Christopher Aubrey appeared at the bar of the House, and charged
Bacon with having received from him a sum of money while his suit was going
on, and with having afterwards decided against him. Bacon's letter[29] on
this occasion is worthy of serious attention; he evidently thought the
charge was but part of the deliberate scheme to ruin him which had already
been in progress. A second accusation (Edward Egerton's case) followed
immediately after, and was investigated by the House, who, satisfied that
they had just matter for reprehension, appointed the 19th for a conference
with the Lords. On that day Bacon, as he had feared, was too ill to attend.
He wrote[30] to the Lords excusing his absence, requesting them to appoint
a convenient time for his defence and cross-examination of witnesses, and
imploring them not to allow their minds to be prejudiced against him, at
the same time declaring that he would not "trick up an innocency with
cavillations, but plainly and ingenuously declare what he knew or
remembered." The charges rapidly accumulated, but Bacon still looked upon
them as party moves, and was in hopes of defending himself.[31] Nor did he
seem to have lost his courage, if we are to believe the common reports of
the day,[32] though certainly they do not appear worthy of very much
credit.

The notes[33] bearing upon the interview which he obtained with the king
show that he had begun to see more clearly the nature and extent of the
offences with which he was charged, that he now felt it impossible
altogether to exculpate himself, and that his hopes were directed towards
obtaining some mitigation of his sentence. The long roll of charges made
upon the 19th of April finally decided him; he gave up all idea of defence,
and wrote to the king begging him to show him favour in this emergency.[34]
The next day he sent in a general confession to the Lords,[35] trusting
that this would be considered satisfactory. The Lords, however, decided
that it was not sufficient as a ground for their censure, and demanded a
detailed and particular confession. A list of twenty-eight charges was then
sent him, to which an answer by letter was required. On the 30th of April
his "confession and humble submission"[36] was handed in. In it, after
going over the several instances, he says, "I do again confess, that on the
points charged upon me, although they should be taken as myself have
declared them, there is a great deal of corruption and neglect; for which I
am heartily and penitently sorry, and submit myself to the judgment, grace,
and mercy of the court."[37] On the 3rd of May, after considerable
discussion, the Lords decided upon the sentence, which was,[38] That he
should undergo fine and ransom of £40,000; that he should be imprisoned in
the Tower during the king's pleasure; that he should be for ever incapable
of any office, place or employment in the state or commonwealth; that he
should never sit in parliament, or come within the verge of the court. This
heavy sentence was [v.03 p.0143] only partially executed. The fine was in
effect remitted by the king; imprisonment in the Tower lasted for about
four days; a general pardon (not of course covering the parliamentary
censure) was made out, and though delayed at the seal for a time by Lord
Keeper Williams, was passed probably in November 1621. The cause of the
delay seems to have lain with Buckingham, whose friendship had cooled, and
who had taken offence at the fallen chancellor's unwillingness to part with
York House. This difference was finally smoothed over, and it was probably
through his influence that Bacon received the much-desired permission to
come within the verge of the court. He never again sat in parliament.

So ends this painful episode, which has given rise to the most severe
condemnation of Bacon, and which still presents great and perhaps
insuperable difficulties. On the whole, the tendency of the most recent and
thorough researches has been towards the opinion that Bacon's own account
of the matter (from which, indeed, our knowledge of it is chiefly drawn) is
substantially correct. He distinguishes three ways in which bribes may be
given,[39] and ingenuously confesses that his own acts amounted to
corruption and were worthy of condemnation. Now, corruption strictly
interpreted would imply the deliberate sale of justice, and this Bacon
explicitly denies, affirming that he never "had bribe or reward in his eye
or thought when he pronounced any sentence or order." When we analyse the
specific charges against him, with his answers to them, we find many that
are really of little weight. The twenty-eighth and last, that of negligence
in looking after his servants, though it did him much harm, may fairly be
said to imply no moral blame. The majority of the others are instances of
gratuities given after the decision, and it is to be regretted that the
judgment of the peers gives us no means of determining how such gifts were
looked upon, whether or not the acceptance of them was regarded as a
"corrupt" practice. In four cases specifically, and in some others by
implication, Bacon confesses that he had received bribes from suitors
_pendente lite_. Yet he affirms, as we said before, that his intention was
never swayed by a bribe; and so far as any of these cases can be traced,
his decisions, often given in conjunction with some other official, are to
all appearance thoroughly just. In several cases his judgment appears to
have been given against the party bestowing the bribe, and in at least one
instance, that of Lady Wharton, it seems impossible to doubt that he must
have known when accepting the present that his opinion would be adverse to
her cause. Although, then, he felt that these practices were really
corrupt, and even rejoiced that his own fall would tend to purify the
courts from them,[40] he did not feel that he was guilty of perverting
justice for the sake of reward. How far, then, is such defence or
explanation admissible and satisfactory? It is clear that two things are to
be considered: the one the guilt of taking bribes or presents on any
consideration, the other the moral guilt depending upon the wilful
perversion of justice. The attempt has sometimes been made to defend the
whole of Bacon's conduct on the ground that he did nothing that was not
done by many of his contemporaries. Bacon himself disclaims a defence of
this nature, and we really have no direct evidence which shows to what
extent the offering and receiving of such bribes then prevailed. That the
practice was common is indeed implied by the terms in which Bacon speaks of
it, and it is not improbable that the fact of these gifts being taken by
officials was a thing fairly well known, although all were aware of their
illegal character, and it was plain that any public exposure of such
dealings would be fatal to the individual against whom the charge was made
out.[41] Bacon knew all this; he was well aware that the practice was in
itself indefensible,[42] and that his conduct was therefore corrupt and
deserving of censure. So far, then, as the mere taking of bribes is
concerned, he would permit no defence, and his own confession and judgment
on his action contain as severe a condemnation as has ever been passed upon
him. Yet in the face of this he does not hesitate to call himself "the
justest chancellor that hath been in the five changes since Sir Nicholas
Bacon's time";[43] and this on the plea that his intentions had always been
pure, and had never been affected by the presents he received. His
justification has been set aside by modern critics, not on the ground that
the evidence demonstrates its falsity,[44] but because it is inconceivable
or unnatural that any man should receive a present from another, and not
suffer his judgment to be swayed thereby. It need hardly be said that such
an _a priori_ conviction is not a sufficient basis on which to found a
sweeping condemnation of Bacon's integrity as an administrator of justice.
On the other hand, even if it be admitted to be possible and conceivable
that a present should be given by a suitor simply as seeking favourable
consideration of his cause, and not as desirous of obtaining an unjust
decree, and should be accepted by the judge on the same understanding, this
would not entitle one absolutely to accept Bacon's statement. Further
evidence is necessary in order to give foundation to a definite judgment
either way; and it is extremely improbable, nay, almost impossible, that
such can ever be produced. In these circumstances, due weight should be
given to Bacon's own assertions of his perfect innocence and purity of
intention; they ought not to be put out of court unless found in actual
contradiction to the facts, and the reverse of this is the case, so far as
has yet appeared.[45]

The remaining five years of his life, though he was still harassed by want
of means, for James was not liberal, were spent in work far more valuable
to the world than anything he had accomplished in his high office. In March
1622 he presented to Prince Charles his _History of Henry VII._; and
immediately, with unwearied industry, set to work to complete some portions
of his great work. In November 1622 appeared the _Historia Ventorum_; in
January 1622/3, the _Historia Vitae et Mortis_; and in October of the same
year, the _De Augmentis Scientiarum_, a Latin translation, with many
additions, of the _Advancement_. Finally, in December 1624, he published
his _Apophthegms_, and _Translations of some of the Psalms_, dedicated to
George Herbert; and, in 1625, a third and enlarged edition of the _Essays_.

Busily occupied with these labours, his life now drew rapidly to a close.
In March 1626 he came to London, and when driving one day near Highgate,
was taken with a desire to discover whether snow would act as an
antiseptic. He stopped his carriage, got out at a cottage, purchased a
fowl, and with his own hands assisted to stuff it with snow. He was seized
with a sudden chill, and became so seriously unwell that he had to be
conveyed to Lord Arundel's house, which was near at hand. Here his illness
increased, the cold and chill brought on bronchitis and he died, after a
few days' suffering, on the 9th of April 1626.

[v.03 p.0144] _Bacon's Works and Philosophy._

A complete survey of Bacon's works and an estimate of his place in
literature and philosophy are matters for a volume. It is here proposed
merely to classify the works, to indicate their general character and to
enter somewhat more in detail upon what he himself regarded as his great
achievement,--the reorganization of the sciences and the exposition of a
new method by which the human mind might proceed with security and
certainty towards the true end of all human thought and action.

Putting aside the letters and occasional writings, we may conveniently
distribute the other works into three classes, _Professional, Literary,
Philosophical_. The Professional works include the _Reading on the Statute
of Uses_, the _Maxims of Law_ and the treatise (possibly spurious) on the
_Use of the Law_. "I am in good hope," said Bacon himself, "that when Sir
Edward Coke's reports and my rules and decisions shall come to posterity,
there will be (whatsoever is now thought) question who was the greater
lawyer." If Coke's reports show completer mastery of technical details,
greater knowledge of precedent, and more of the dogged grasp of the letter
than do Bacon's legal writings, there can be no dispute that the latter
exhibit an infinitely more comprehensive intelligence of the abstract
principles of jurisprudence, with a richness and ethical fulness that more
than compensate for their lack of dry legal detail. Bacon seems indeed to
have been a lawyer of the first order, with a keen scientific insight into
the bearings of isolated facts and a power of generalization which
admirably fitted him for the self-imposed task, unfortunately never
completed, of digesting or codifying the chaotic mass of the English law.

Among the literary works are included all that he himself designated moral
and historical pieces, and to these may be added some theological and minor
writings, such as the _Apophthegms_. Of the moral works the most valuable
are the _Essays_, which have been so widely read and universally admired.
The matter is of the familiar, practical kind, that "comes home to men's
bosoms." The thoughts are weighty, and even when not original have acquired
a peculiar and unique tone or cast by passing through the crucible of
Bacon's mind. A sentence from the _Essays_ can rarely be mistaken for the
production of any other writer. The short, pithy sayings have become
popular mottoes and household words. The style is quaint, original,
abounding in allusions and witticisms, and rich, even to gorgeousness, with
piled-up analogies and metaphors.[46] The first edition contained only ten
essays, but the number was increased in 1612 to thirty-eight, and in 1625
to fifty-eight. The short tract, _Colours of Good and Evil_, which with the
_Meditationes Sacrae_ originally accompanied the Essays, was afterwards
incorporated with the _De Augmentis_. Along with these works may be classed
the curiously learned piece, _De Sapientia Veterum_, in which he works out
a favourite idea, that the mythological fables of the Greeks were
allegorical and concealed the deepest truths of their philosophy. As a
scientific explanation of the myths the theory is of no value, but it
affords fine scope for the exercise of Bacon's unrivalled power of
detecting analogies in things apparently most dissimilar. The
_Apophthegms_, though hardly deserving Macaulay's praise of being the best
collection of jests in the world, contain a number of those significant
anecdotes which Bacon used with such effect in his other writings. Of the
historical works, besides a few fragments of the projected history of
Britain there remains the _History of Henry VII._, a valuable work, giving
a clear and animated narrative of the reign, and characterizing Henry with
great skill. The style is in harmony with the matter, vigorous and flowing,
but naturally with less of the quaintness and richness suitable to more
thoughtful and original writings. The series of the literary works is
completed by the minor treatises on theological or ecclesiastical
questions. Some of the latter, included among the occasional works, are
sagacious and prudent and deserve careful study. Of the former, the
principal specimens are the _Meditationes Sacrae_ and the _Confession of
Faith_. The _Paradoxes_ (Characters of a believing Christian in paradoxes,
and seeming contradictions), which was often and justly suspected, has been
conclusively proved by Grosart to be the work of another author.

_Philosophical Works._--The great mass of Bacon's writings consists of
treatises or fragments, which either formed integral parts of his grand
comprehensive scheme, or were closely connected with it. More exactly they
may be classified under three heads: (A) Writings originally intended to
form parts of the _Instauratio_, but which were afterwards superseded or
thrown aside; (B) Works connected with the _Instauratio_, but not directly
included in its plan; (C) Writings which actually formed part of the
_Instauratio Magna_.

(A) This class contains some important tracts, which certainly contain
little, if anything, that is not afterwards taken up and expanded in the
more elaborate works, but are not undeserving of attention, from the
difference in the point of view and method of treatment. The most valuable
of them are: (1) _The Advancement of Learning_, of which no detailed
account need be given, as it is completely worked up into the _De
Augmentis_, and takes its place as the first part of the _Instauratio_. (2)
_Valerius Terminus_, a very remarkable piece, composed probably about 1603,
though perhaps retouched at a later period. It contains a brief and
somewhat obscure outline of the first two parts in the _Instauratio_, and
is of importance as affording us some insight into the gradual development
of the system in Bacon's own mind. (3) _Temporis Partus Masculus_, another
curious fragment, remarkable not only from its contents, but from its
style, which is arrogant and offensive, in this respect unlike any other
writing of Bacon's. The adjective _masculus_ points to the power of
bringing forth fruit possessed by the new philosophy, and perhaps indicates
that all previous births of time were to be looked upon as feminine or
imperfect; it is used in a somewhat similar sense in _Letters and Life_,
vi. 183, "_In verbis masculis_, no flourishing or painted words, but such
words as are fit to go before deeds." (4) _Redargutio Philosophiarum_, a
highly finished piece in the form of an oration, composed probably about
1608 or 1609, and containing in pretty full detail much of what afterwards
appears in connexion with the _Idola Theatri_ in book i. of the _Novum
Organum_. (5) _Cogitata et Visa_, perhaps the most important of the minor
philosophical writings, dating from 1607 (though possibly the tract in its
present form may have been to some extent altered), and containing in
weighty and sonorous Latin the substance of the first book of the
_Organum_. (6) The _Descriptio Globi Intellectualis_, which is to some
extent intermediate between the _Advancement_ and the _De Augmentis_, goes
over in detail the general classification of the sciences, and enters
particularly on some points of minor interest. (7) The brief tract _De
Interpretatione Naturae Sententiae Duodecim_ is evidently a first sketch of
part of the _Novum Organum_, and in phraseology is almost identical with
it. (8) A few smaller pieces, such as the _Inquisitio de Motu_, the _Calor
et Frigus_, the _Historia Soni et Auditus_ and the _Phaenomena Universi_,
are early specimens of his _Natural History_, and exhibit the first
tentative applications of the new method.

(B) The second group consists of treatises on subjects connected with the
_Instauratio_, but not forming part of it. The most interesting, and in
many respects the most remarkable, is the philosophic romance, the _New
Atlantis_, a description of an ideal state in which the principles of the
new philosophy are carried out by political machinery and under state
guidance, and where many of the results contemplated by Bacon are in
imagination attained. The work was to have been completed by the addition
of a second part, treating of the laws of a model commonwealth, which was
never written. Another important tract is the _De Principiis atque
Originibus secundum Fabulas Cupidinis et Caeli_, where, under the disguise
of two old mythological stories, he (in the manner of the _Sapientia
Veterum_) finds the deepest truths [v.03 p.0145] concealed. The tract is
unusually interesting, for in it he discusses at some length the limits of
science, the origin of things and the nature of primitive matter, giving at
the same time full notices of Democritus among the ancient philosophers and
of Telesio among the modern. Deserving of attention are also the
_Cogitationes de Natura Rerum_, probably written early, perhaps in 1605,
and the treatise on the theory of the tides, _De Fluxu et Refluxu Maris_,
written probably about 1616.

(C) The philosophical works which form part of the _Instauratio_ must of
course be classed according to the positions which they respectively hold
in that scheme of the sciences.

The great work, the reorganization of the sciences, and the restoration of
man to that command over nature which he had lost by the fall, consisted in
its final form of six divisions.

I. _Partitiones Scientiarum_, a survey of the sciences, either such as then
existed or such as required to be constructed afresh--in fact, an inventory
of all the possessions of the human mind. The famous classification[47] on
which this survey proceeds is based upon an analysis of the faculties and
objects of human knowledge. This division is represented by the _De
Augmentis Scientiarum_.

II. _Interpretatio Naturae._--After the survey of all that has yet been
done in the way of discovery or invention, comes the new method, by which
the mind of man is to be trained and directed in its progress towards the
renovation of science. This division is represented, though only
imperfectly, by the _Novum Organum_, particularly book ii.

III. _Historia Naturalis et Experimentalis._--The new method is valueless,
because inapplicable, unless it be supplied with materials duly collected
and presented--in fact, unless there be formed a competent natural history
of the _Phaenomena Universi_. A short introductory sketch of the requisites
of such a natural history, which, according to Bacon, is essential,
necessary, the _basis totius negotii_, is given in the tract _Parasceve_,
appended to the _Novum Organum_. The principal works intended to form
portions of the history, and either published by himself or left in
manuscript, are _Historia Ventorum_, _Historia Vitae et Mortis_, _Historia
Densi et Rari_, and the extensive collection of facts and observations
entitled _Sylva Sylvarum_.

IV. _Scala Intellectus._--It might have been supposed that the new
philosophy could now be inaugurated. Materials had been supplied, along
with a new method by which they were to be treated, and naturally the next
step would be the finished result. But for practical purposes Bacon
interposed two divisions between the preliminaries and the philosophy
itself. The first was intended to consist of types or examples of
investigations conducted by the new method, serviceable for keeping the
whole process vividly before the mind, or, as the title indicates, such
that the mind could run rapidly up and down the several steps or grades in
the process. Of this division there seems to be only one small fragment,
the _Filum Labyrinthi_, consisting of but two or three pages.

V. _Prodromi_, forerunners of the new philosophy. This part, strictly
speaking, is quite extraneous to the general design. According to the
_Distributio Operis_,[48] it was to contain certain speculations of Bacon's
own, not formed by the new method, but by the unassisted use of his
understanding. These, therefore, form temporary or uncertain anticipations
of the new philosophy. There is extant a short preface to this division of
the work, and according to Spedding some of the miscellaneous treatises,
such as _De Principiis_, _De Fluxu et Refluxu_, _Cogitationes de Natura
Rerum_, may probably have been intended to be included under this head.
This supposition receives some support from the manner in which the fifth
part is spoken of in the _Novum Organum_, i. 116.

VI. The new philosophy, which is the work of future ages, and the result of
the new method.

Bacon's grand motive in his attempt to found the sciences anew was the
intense conviction that the knowledge man possessed was of little service
to him. "The knowledge whereof the world is now possessed, especially that
of nature, extendeth not to magnitude and certainty of works."[49] Man's
sovereignty over nature, which is founded on knowledge alone, had been
lost, and instead of the free relation between things and the human mind,
there was nothing but vain notions and blind experiments. To restore the
original commerce between man and nature, and to recover the _imperium
hominis_, is the grand object of all science. The want of success which had
hitherto attended efforts in the same direction had been due to many
causes, but chiefly to the want of appreciation of the nature of philosophy
and its real aim. Philosophy is not the science of things divine and human;
it is not the search after truth. "I find that even those that have sought
knowledge for itself, and not for benefit or ostentation, or any practical
enablement in the course of their life, have nevertheless propounded to
themselves a wrong mark, namely, satisfaction (which men call Truth) and
not operation."[50] "Is there any such happiness as for a man's mind to be
raised above the confusion of things, where he may have the prospect of the
order of nature and error of man? But is this a view of delight only and
not of discovery? of contentment and not of benefit? Shall he not as well
discern the riches of nature's warehouse as the beauty of her shop? Is
truth ever barren? Shall he not be able thereby to produce worthy effects,
and to endow the life of man with infinite commodities?"[51] Philosophy is
altogether practical; it is of little matter to the fortunes of humanity
what abstract notions one may entertain concerning the nature and the
principles of things.[52] This truth, however, has never yet been
recognized;[53] it has not yet been seen that the true aim of all science
is "to endow the condition and life of man with new powers or works,"[54]
or "to extend more widely the limits of the power and greatness of
man."[55] Nevertheless, it is not to be imagined that by this being
proposed as the great object of search there is thereby excluded all that
has hitherto been looked upon as the higher aims of human life, such as the
contemplation of truth. Not so, but by following the new aim we shall also
arrive at a _true_ knowledge of the universe in which we are, for without
knowledge there is no power; truth and utility are in ultimate aspect the
same; "works themselves are of greater value as pledges of truth than as
contributing to the comforts of life."[56] Such was the conception of
philosophy with which Bacon started, and in which he felt himself to be
thoroughly original. As his object was new and hitherto unproposed, so the
method he intended to employ was different from all modes of investigation
hitherto attempted. "It would be," as he says, "an unsound fancy and
self-contradictory, to expect that things which have never yet been done
can be done except by means which have never yet been tried."[57] There
were many obstacles in his way, and he seems always to have felt that the
first part of the new scheme must be a _pars destruens_, a destructive
criticism of all other methods. Opposition was to be expected, not only
from previous philosophies, but especially from the human mind itself. In
the first place, natural antagonism might be looked for from the two
opposed sects, the one of whom, in despair of knowledge, maintained that
all science was impossible; while the other, resting on authority and on
the learning that had been handed down from the Greeks, declared that
science was already completely known, and consequently devoted their
energies to methodizing and elaborating it. Secondly, within the domain of
science itself, properly so called, there were two "kind of rovers" who
must be dismissed. The first were the speculative or logical philosophers,
who construe the universe _ex analogia hominis_, and not _ex analogia
mundi_, who fashion nature according to preconceived ideas, and who employ
in their investigations syllogism and abstract reasoning. The second class,
who were equally offensive, consisted of those who practised blind
experience, which is mere [v.03 p.0146] groping in the dark (_vaga
experientia mera palpatio est_), who occasionally hit upon good works or
inventions, which, like Atalanta's apples, distracted them from further
steady and gradual progress towards universal truth. In place of these
straggling efforts of the unassisted human mind, a graduated system of
helps was to be supplied, by the use of which the mind, when placed on the
right road, would proceed with unerring and mechanical certainty to the
invention of new arts and sciences.

Such were to be the peculiar functions of the new method, though it has not
definitely appeared what that method was, or to what objects it could be
applied. But, before proceeding to unfold his method, Bacon found it
necessary to enter in considerable detail upon the general subject of the
obstacles to progress, and devoted nearly the whole of the first book of
the _Organum_ to the examination of them. This discussion, though strictly
speaking extraneous to the scheme, has always been looked upon as a most
important part of his philosophy, and his name is perhaps as much
associated with the doctrine of Idols (_Idola_) as with the theory of
induction or the classification of the sciences.

The doctrine of the kinds of fallacies or general classes of errors into
which the human mind is prone to fall, appears in many of the works written
before the _Novum Organum_, and the treatment of them varies in some
respects. The classification in the _Organum_, however, not only has the
author's sanction, but has received the stamp of historical acceptation;
and comparison of the earlier notices, though a point of literary interest,
has no important philosophic bearing. The _Idola_ (_Nov. Org._ i. 39)[58]
false notions of things, or erroneous ways of looking at nature, are of
four kinds: the first two innate, pertaining to the very nature of the mind
and not to be eradicated; the third creeping insensibly into men's minds,
and hence in a sense innate and inseparable; the fourth imposed from
without. The first kind are the _Idola Tribus_, idols of the tribe,
fallacies incident to humanity or the race in general. Of these, the most
prominent are--the proneness to suppose in nature greater order and
regularity than there actually is; the tendency to support a preconceived
opinion by affirmative instances, neglecting all negative or opposed cases;
and the tendency to generalize from few observations, or to give reality to
mere abstractions, figments of the mind. Manifold errors also result from
the weakness of the senses, which affords scope for mere conjecture; from
the influence exercised over the understanding by the will and passions;
from the restless desire of the mind to penetrate to the ultimate
principles of things; and from the belief that "man is the measure of the
universe," whereas, in truth, the world is received by us in a distorted
and erroneous manner. The second kind are the _Idola Specus_, idols of the
cave, or errors incident to the peculiar mental or bodily constitution of
each individual, for according to the state of the individual's mind is his
view of things. Errors of this class are innumerable, because there are
numberless varieties of disposition; but some very prominent specimens can
be indicated. Such are the tendency to make all things subservient to, or
take the colour of some favourite subject, the extreme fondness and
reverence either for what is ancient or for what is modern, and excess in
noting either differences or resemblances amongst things. A practical rule
for avoiding these is also given: "In general let every student of nature
take this as a rule, that whatever his mind seizes and dwells upon with
particular satisfaction is to be held in suspicion."[59] The third class
are the _Idola Fori_, idols of the market-place, errors arising from the
influence exercised over the mind by mere words. This, according to Bacon,
is the most troublesome kind of error, and has been especially fatal in
philosophy. For words introduce a fallacious mode of looking at things in
two ways: first, there are some words that are really merely names for
non-existent things, which are yet supposed to exist simply because they
have received a name; secondly, there are names hastily and unskilfully
abstracted from a few objects and applied recklessly to all that has the
faintest analogy with these objects, thus causing the grossest confusion.
The fourth and last class are the _Idola Theatri_, idols of the theatre,
_i.e._ fallacious modes of thinking resulting from received systems of
philosophy and from erroneous methods of demonstration. The criticism of
the demonstrations is introduced later in close connexion with Bacon's new
method; they are the rival modes of procedure, to which his own is
definitely opposed. The philosophies which are "redargued" are divided into
three classes, the sophistical, of which the best example is Aristotle,
who, according to Bacon, forces nature into his abstract schemata and
thinks to explain by definitions; the empirical, which from few and limited
experiments leaps at once to general conclusions; and the superstitious,
which corrupts philosophy by the introduction of poetical and theological
notions.

Such are the general causes of the errors that infest the human mind; by
their exposure the way is cleared for the introduction of the new method.
The nature of this method cannot be understood until it is exactly seen to
what it is to be applied. What idea had Bacon of science, and how is his
method connected with it? Now, the science[60] which was specially and
invariably contemplated by him was natural philosophy, the great mother of
all the sciences; it was to him the type of scientific knowledge, and its
method was the method of all true science. To discover exactly the
characteristics and the object of natural philosophy it is necessary to
examine the place it holds in the general scheme furnished in the
_Advancement_ or _De Augmentis_. All human knowledge, it is there laid
down, may be referred to man's memory or imagination or reason. In the
first, the bare facts presented to sense are collected and stored up; the
exposition of them is _history_, which is either natural or civil. In the
second, the materials of sense are separated or divided in ways not
corresponding to nature but after the mind's own pleasure, and the result
is _poesy_ or feigned history. In the third, the materials are worked up
after the model or pattern of nature, though we are prone to err in the
progress from sense to reason; the result is _philosophy_, which is
concerned either with God, with nature or with man, the second being the
most important. Natural philosophy is again divided into speculative or
theoretical and operative or practical, according as the end is
contemplation or works. Speculative or theoretical natural philosophy has
to deal with natural substances and qualities and is subdivided into
physics and metaphysics. Physics inquires into the efficient and material
causes of things; metaphysics, into the formal and final causes. The
principal objects of physics are concrete substances, or abstract though
physical qualities. The research into abstract qualities, the fundamental
problem of physics, comes near to the metaphysical study of _forms_, which
indeed differs from the first only in being more general, and in having as
its results a _form_ strictly so called, _i.e._ a nature or quality which
is a limitation or specific manifestation of some higher and better-known
genus.[61] Natural philosophy is, therefore, in ultimate resort the study
of _forms_, and, consequently, the fundamental problem of philosophy in
general is the discovery of these _forms_.

    "On a given body to generate or superinduce a new nature or natures, is
    the work and aim of human power.... Of a given nature to discover the
    form or true specific difference, or nature-engendering nature (_natura
    naturans_) or source of emanation (for these are the terms which are
    nearest to a description of the thing), is the work and aim of human
    knowledge."[62]

The questions, then, whose answers give the key to the whole Baconian
philosophy, may be put briefly thus--What are [v.03 p.0147] forms? and how
is it that knowledge of them solves both the theoretical and the practical
problem of science? Bacon himself, as may be seen from the passage quoted
above, finds great difficulty in giving an adequate and exact definition of
what he means by a form. As a general description, the following passage
from the _Novum Organum_, ii. 4, may be cited:--

    "The form of a nature is such that given the form the nature infallibly
    follows.... Again, the form is such that if it be taken away the nature
    infallibly vanishes.... Lastly, the true form is such that it deduces
    the given nature from some source of being which is inherent in more
    natures, and which is better known in the natural order of things than
    the form itself."[63]

From this it would appear that, since by a _nature_ is meant some sensible
quality, superinduced upon, or possessed by, a body, so by a form we are to
understand the cause of that nature, which cause is itself a determinate
case or manifestation of some general or abstract quality inherent in a
greater number of objects. But all these are mostly marks by which a form
may be recognized, and do not explain what the form really is. A further
definition is accordingly attempted in Aph. 13:--

    "The form of a thing is the very thing itself, and the thing differs
    from the form no otherwise than as the apparent differs from the real,
    or the external from the internal, or the thing in reference to the man
    from the thing in reference to the universe."

This throws a new light on the question, and from it the inference at once
follows, that the forms are the permanent causes or substances underlying
all visible phenomena, which are merely manifestations of their activity.
Are the forms, then, forces? At times it seems as if Bacon had approximated
to this view of the nature of things, for in several passages he identifies
forms with laws of activity. Thus, he says--

    "When I speak of forms I mean nothing more than those laws and
    determinations of absolute actuality which govern and constitute any
    simple nature, as heat, light, weight, in every kind of matter and
    subject that is susceptible of them. Thus the form of heat or the form
    of light is the same thing as the law of heat or the law of light."[64]
    "Matter rather than forms should be the object of our attention, its
    configurations and changes of configuration, and simple action, and law
    of action or motion; for forms are figments of the human mind, unless
    you will call those laws of action forms."[65] "Forms or true
    differences of things, which are in fact laws of pure act."[66] "For
    though in nature nothing really exists besides individual bodies,
    performing pure individual acts according to a fixed law, yet in
    philosophy this very law, and the investigation, discovery and
    explanation of it, is the foundation as well of knowledge as of
    operation. And it is this law, with its clauses, that I mean when I
    speak of forms."[67]

Several important conclusions may be drawn from these passages. In the
first place, it is evident that Bacon, like the Atomical school, of whom he
highly approved, had a clear perception and a firm grasp of the _physical_
character of natural principles; his _forms_ are no ideas or abstractions,
but highly general physical properties. Further, it is hinted that these
general qualities may be looked upon as the modes of action of simple
bodies. This fruitful conception, however, Bacon does not work out; and
though he uses the word _cause_, and identifies _form_ with _formal cause_,
yet it is perfectly apparent that the modern notions of cause as dynamical,
and of nature as in a process of flow or development, are foreign to him,
and that in his view of the ultimate problem of science, cause meant _causa
immanens_, or underlying substance, effects were not consequents but
manifestations, and nature was regarded in a purely statical aspect. That
this is so appears even more clearly when we examine his general conception
of the unity, gradation and function of the sciences. That the sciences are
organically connected is a thought common to him and to his distinguished
predecessor Roger Bacon. "I that hold it for a great impediment towards the
advancement and further invention of knowledge, that particular arts and
sciences have been disincorporated from general knowledge, do not
understand one and the same thing which Cicero's discourse and the note and
conceit of the Grecians in their word _circle learning_ do intend. For I
mean not that use which one science hath of another for ornament or help in
practice; but I mean it directly of that use by way of supply of light and
information, which the particulars and instances of one science do yield
and present for the framing or correcting of the axioms of another science
in their very truth and notion."[68] In accordance with this, Bacon placed
at the basis of the particular sciences which treat of God, nature and man,
one fundamental doctrine, the _Prima Philosophia_, or first philosophy, the
function of which was to display the unity of nature by connecting into one
body of truth such of the highest axioms of the subordinate sciences as
were not special to one science, but common to several.[69] This first
philosophy had also to investigate what are called the adventitious or
transcendental conditions of essences, such as Much, Little, Like, Unlike,
Possible, Impossible, Being, Nothing, the logical discussion of which
certainly belonged rather to the laws of reasoning than to the existence of
things, but the physical or real treatment of which might be expected to
yield answers to such questions as, why certain substances are numerous,
others scarce; or why, if like attracts like, iron does not attract iron.
Following this summary philosophy come the sciences proper, rising like a
pyramid in successive stages, the lowest floor being occupied by natural
history or experience, the second by physics, the third, which is next the
peak of unity, by metaphysics.[70] The knowledge of the peak, or of the one
law which binds nature together, is perhaps denied to man. Of the sciences,
physics, as has been already seen, deals with the efficient and material,
_i.e._ with the variable and transient, causes of things. But its inquiries
may be directed either towards concrete bodies or towards abstract
qualities. The first kind of investigation rises little above mere natural
history; but the other is more important and paves the way for metaphysics.
It handles the configurations and the appetites or motions of matter. The
configurations, or inner structure of bodies, include dense, rare, heavy,
light, hot, cold, &c.,--in fact, what are elsewhere called simple natures.
Motions[71] are either simple or compound, the latter being the sum of a
number of the former. In physics, however, these matters are treated only
as regards their material or efficient causes, and the result of inquiry
into any one case gives no general rule, but only facilitates invention in
some similar instance. Metaphysics, on the other hand, treats of the formal
or final cause of[72] these same substances and qualities, and results in a
general rule. With regard to forms, the investigation may be directed
either towards concrete bodies or towards qualities. But the forms of
substances "are so perplexed and complicated, that it is either vain to
inquire into them at all, or such inquiry as is possible should be put off
for a time, and not entered upon till forms of a more simple nature have
been rightly investigated and discussed."[73] "To inquire into the form of
a lion, of an oak, or gold, nay, even of water or air, is a vain pursuit;
but to inquire the _form_ of dense, rare, hot, cold, &c., as well
configurations as motions, which in treating of physic I have in [v.03
p.0148] great part enumerated (I call them forms of the first class), and
which (like the letters of the alphabet) are not many, and yet make up and
sustain the essences and forms of all substances--this, I say, it is which
I am attempting, and which constitutes and defines that part of metaphysic
of which we are now inquiring." Physics inquires into the same qualities,
but does not push its investigations into ultimate reality or reach the
more general causes. We thus at last attain a definite conclusion with
regard to forms, and it appears clear that in Bacon's belief the true
function of science was the search for a few fundamental physical
qualities, highly abstract and general, the combinations of which give rise
to the simple natures and complex phenomena around us. His general
conception of the universe may therefore be called mechanical or statical;
the cause of each phenomenon is supposed to be actually contained in the
phenomenon itself, and by a sufficiently accurate process could be sifted
out and brought to light. As soon as the causes are known man regains his
power over nature, for "whosoever knows any form, knows also the utmost
possibility of superinducing that nature upon every variety of matter, and
so is less restrained and tied in operation either to the basis of the
matter or to the condition of the efficients."[74]

Nature thus presented itself to Bacon's mind as a huge congeries of
phenomena, the manifestations of some simple and primitive qualities, which
were hid from us by the complexity of the things themselves. The world was
a vast labyrinth, amid the windings of which we require some clue or thread
whereby we may track our way to knowledge and thence to power. This thread,
the _filum labyrinthi_, is the new method of _induction_. But, as has been
frequently pointed out, the new method could not be applied until facts had
been observed and collected. This is an indispensable preliminary. "Man,
the servant and interpreter of nature, can do and understand so much, and
so much only, as he has observed in fact or in thought of the course of
nature; beyond this he neither knows anything nor can do anything." The
proposition that our knowledge of nature necessarily begins with
observation and experience, is common to Bacon and many contemporary
reformers of science, but he laid peculiar stress upon it, and gave it a
new meaning. What he really meant by observation was a competent natural
history or collection of facts. "The firm foundations of a purer natural
philosophy are laid in natural history."[75] "First of all we must prepare
a _natural and experimental history_, sufficient and good; and this is the
foundation of all."[76] The senses and the memory, which collect and store
up facts, must be assisted; there must be a _ministration_ of the senses
and another of the memory. For not only are instances required, but these
must be arranged in such a manner as not to distract or confuse the mind,
_i.e._ tables and arrangements of instances must be constructed. In the
preliminary collection the greatest care must be taken that the mind be
absolutely free from preconceived ideas; nature is only to be conquered by
obedience; man must be merely receptive. "All depends on keeping the eye
steadily fixed upon the facts of nature, and so receiving their images
simply as they are; for God forbid that we should give out a dream of our
own imagination for a pattern of the world; rather may He graciously grant
to us to write an apocalypse or true vision of the footsteps of the Creator
imprinted on his creatures."[77] Concealed among the facts presented to
sense are the causes or forms, and the problem therefore is so to analyse
experience[78], so to break it up into pieces, that we shall with certainty
and mechanical ease arrive at a true conclusion. This process, which forms
the essence of the new method, may in its entirety, as a ministration to
the reason, be called a logic; but it differs widely from the ordinary or
school logic in end, method and form. Its aim is to acquire command over
nature by knowledge, and to invent new arts, whereas the old logic strove
only after dialectic victories and the discovery of new arguments. In
method the difference is even more fundamental. Hitherto the mode of
demonstration had been by the syllogism; but the syllogism is, in many
respects, an incompetent weapon. It is compelled to accept its first
principles on trust from the science in which it is employed; it cannot
cope with the subtlety of nature; and it is radically vitiated by being
founded on hastily and inaccurately abstracted notions of things. For a
syllogism consists of propositions, propositions of words, and words are
the symbols of notions. Now the first step in accurate progress from sense
to reason, or true philosophy, is to frame a _bona notio_ or accurate
conception of the thing; but the received logic never does this. It flies
off at once from experience and particulars to the highest and most general
propositions, and from these descends, by the use of middle terms, to
axioms of lower generality. Such a mode of procedure may be called
_anticipatio naturae_ (for in it reason is allowed to prescribe to things),
and is opposed to the true method, the _interpretatio naturae_, in which
reason follows and obeys nature, discovering her secrets by obedience and
submission to rule. Lastly, the very form of induction that has been used
by logicians in the collection of their instances is a weak and useless
thing. It is a mere enumeration of a few known facts, makes no use of
exclusions or rejections, concludes precariously, and is always liable to
be overthrown by a negative instance.[79] In radical opposition to this
method the Baconian induction begins by supplying helps and guides to the
senses, whose unassisted information could not be relied on. Notions were
formed carefully, and not till after a certain process of induction was
completed.[80] The formation of axioms was to be carried on by a gradually
ascending scale. "Then and only then may we hope well of the sciences, when
in a just scale of ascent and by successive steps, not interrupted or
broken, we rise from particulars to lesser axioms; and then to middle
axioms, one above the other; and last of all to the most general."[81]
Finally the very form of induction itself must be new. "The induction which
is to be available for the discovery and demonstration of sciences and arts
must analyse nature by proper rejections and exclusions; and then, after a
sufficient number of negatives, come to a conclusion on the affirmative
instances, which has not yet been done, or even attempted, save only by
Plato.[82] ... And this induction must be used not only to discover axioms,
but also in the formation of notions."[83] This view of the function of
exclusion is closely connected with Bacon's doctrine of forms, [v.03
p.0149] and is in fact dependent upon that theory. But induction is neither
the whole of the new method, nor is it applicable to forms only. There are
two other grand objects of inquiry: the one, the transformation of concrete
bodies; the other, the investigation of the latent powers and the latent
schematism or configuration. With regard to the first, in ultimate result
it depends upon the theory of forms; for whenever the compound body can be
regarded as the sum of certain simple natures, then our knowledge of the
forms of these natures gives us the power of superinducing a new nature on
the concrete body. As regards the latent process (_latens processus_) which
goes on in all cases of generation and continuous development or motion, we
examine carefully, and by quantitative measurements, the gradual growth and
change from the first elements to the completed thing. The same kind of
investigation may be extended to many cases of natural motion, such as
voluntary action or nutrition; and though inquiry is here directed towards
concrete bodies, and does not therefore penetrate so deeply into reality as
in research for forms, yet great results may be looked for with more
confidence. It is to be regretted that Bacon did not complete this portion
of his work, in which for the first time he approaches modern conceptions
of change. The latent configuration (_latens schematismus_) or inward
structure of the parts of a body must be known before we can hope to
superinduce a new nature upon it. This can only be discovered by analysis,
which will disclose the ultimate constituents (natural particles, not
atoms) of bodies, and lead back the discussion to forms or simple natures,
whereby alone can true light be thrown on these obscure questions. Thus, in
all cases, scientific explanation depends upon knowledge of forms; all
phenomena or secondary qualities are accounted for by being referred to the
primary qualities of matter.

The several steps in the inductive investigation of the form of any nature
flow readily from the definition of the form itself. For that is always and
necessarily present when the nature is present, absent when it is absent,
decreases and increases according as the nature decreases and increases. It
is therefore requisite for the inquiry to have before us instances in which
the nature is present. The list of these is called the table of _Essence
and Presence_. Secondly, we must have instances in which the nature is
absent; only as such cases might be infinite, attention should be limited
to such of them as are most akin to the instances of presence.[84] The list
in this case is called table of _Absence in Proximity_. Thirdly, we must
have a number of instances in which the nature is present in different
degrees, either increasing or decreasing in the same subject, or variously
present in different subjects. This is the table of _Degrees_, or
_Comparison_. After the formation of these tables, we proceed to apply what
is perhaps the most valuable part of the Baconian method, and that in which
the author took most pride, the process of exclusion or rejection. This
elimination of the non-essential, grounded on the fundamental propositions
with regard to forms, is the most important of Bacon's contributions to the
logic of induction, and that in which, as he repeatedly says, his method
differs from all previous philosophies. It is evident that if the tables
were complete, and our notions of the respective phenomena clear, the
process of exclusion would be a merely mechanical _counting out_, and would
_infallibly_ lead to the detection of the cause or form. But it is just as
evident that these conditions can never be adequately fulfilled. Bacon saw
that his method was impracticable (though he seems to have thought the
difficulties not insuperable), and therefore set to work to devise new
helps, _adminicula_. These he enumerates in ii., _Aph._ 21:--_Prerogative
Instances, Supports of Induction, Rectification of Induction, Varying the
Investigation according to the Nature of the Subject, Prerogative Natures,
Limits of Investigation, Application to Practice, Preparations for
Investigation, the Ascending and Descending Scale of Axioms_. The remainder
of the _Organum_ is devoted to a consideration of the twenty-seven classes
of Prerogative Instances, and though it contains much that is both luminous
and helpful, it adds little to our knowledge of what constitutes the
Baconian method. On the other heads we have but a few scattered hints. But
although the rigorous requirements of science could only be fulfilled by
the employment of all these means, yet in their absence it was permissible
to draw from the tables and the exclusion a hypothetical conclusion, the
truth of which might be verified by the use of the other processes; such an
hypothesis is called fantastically the First Vintage (_Vindemiatio_). The
inductive method, so far as exhibited in the _Organum_, is exemplified by
an investigation into the nature of heat.

Such was the method devised by Bacon, and to which he ascribed the
qualities of absolute certainty and mechanical simplicity. But even
supposing that this method were accurate and completely unfolded, it is
evident that it could only be made applicable and produce fruit when the
phenomena of the universe have been very completely tabulated and arranged.
In this demand for a complete natural history, Bacon also felt that he was
original, and he was deeply impressed with the necessity for it;[85] in
fact, he seems occasionally to place an even higher value upon it than upon
his _Organum_. Thus, in the preface to his series of works forming the
third part of the _Instauratio_, he says: "It comes, therefore, to this,
that my _Organum_, even if it were completed, would not without the
_Natural History_ much advance the _Instauration of the Sciences_, whereas
the _Natural History_ without the _Organum_ would advance it not a
little."[86] But a complete natural history is evidently a thing
impossible, and in fact a history can only be collected by attending to the
requirements of the _Organum_. This was seen by Bacon, and what may be
regarded as his final opinion on the question is given in the important
letter to Jean Antoine Baranzano[87] ("Redemptus": 1590-1622):--"With
regard to the multitude of instances by which men may be deterred from the
attempt, here is my answer. First, what need to dissemble? Either store of
instances must be procured, or the business must be given up. All other
ways, however enticing, are impassable. Secondly, the prerogatives of
instances, and the mode of experimenting upon experiments of light (which I
shall hereafter explain), will diminish the multitude of them very much.
Thirdly, what matter, I ask, if the description of the instances should
fill six times as many volumes as Pliny's _History_? ... For the true
natural history is to take nothing except instances, connections,
observations and canons."[88] The _Organum_ and the _History_ are thus
correlative, and form the two equally necessary sides of a true philosophy;
by their union the new philosophy is produced.

_Summary._--Two questions may be put to any doctrine which professes to
effect a radical change in philosophy or science. Is it original? Is it
valuable? With regard to the first, it has been already pointed out that
Bacon's induction or inductive method is distinctly his own, though it
cannot and need not be maintained that the general spirit of his philosophy
was entirely new.[89]

The value of the method is the separate and more difficult question. It has
been assailed on the most opposite grounds. Macaulay, while admitting the
accuracy of the process, denied its efficiency, on the ground that an
operation performed naturally was not rendered more easy or efficacious by
being subjected to analysis.[90] This objection is curious when confronted
with Bacon's reiterated assertion that the _natural_ method pursued by the
unassisted human reason is distinctly opposed to his; and it is besides an
argument that tells so strongly against many sciences, as to be
comparatively worthless when applied to any one. There are, however, more
formidable objections against the method. It has been pointed out,[91] and
with perfect justice, [v.03 p.0150] that science in its progress has not
followed the Baconian method, that no one discovery can be pointed to which
can be definitely ascribed to the use of his rules, and that men the most
celebrated for their scientific acquirements, while paying homage to the
name of Bacon, practically set at naught his most cherished precepts. The
reason of this is not far to seek, and has been pointed out by logicians of
the most diametrically opposed schools. The mechanical character both of
the natural history and of the logical method applied to it resulted
necessarily from Bacon's radically false conception of the nature of cause
and of the causal relation. The whole logical or scientific problem is
treated as if it were one of co-existence, to which in truth the method of
exclusion is scarcely applicable, and the assumption is constantly made
that each phenomenon has one and only one cause.[92] The inductive
formation of axioms by a gradually ascending scale is a route which no
science has ever followed, and by which no science could ever make
progress. The true scientific procedure is by hypothesis followed up and
tested by verification; the most powerful instrument is the deductive
method, which Bacon can hardly be said to have recognized. The power of
framing hypothesis points to another want in the Baconian doctrine. If that
power form part of the true method, then the mind is not wholly passive or
recipient; it anticipates nature, and moulds the experience received by it
in accordance with its own constructive ideas or conceptions; and yet
further, the minds of various investigators can never be reduced to the
same dead mechanical level.[93] There will still be room for the scientific
use of the imagination and for the creative flashes of genius.[94]

If, then, Bacon himself made no contributions to science, if no discovery
can be shown to be due to the use of his rules, if his method be logically
defective, and the problem to which it was applied one from its nature
incapable of adequate solution, it may not unreasonably be asked, How has
he come to be looked upon as the great leader in the reformation of modern
science? How is it that he shares with Descartes the honour of inaugurating
modern philosophy? To this the true answer seems to be that Bacon owes his
position not only to the general spirit of his philosophy, but to the
manner in which he worked into a connected system the new mode of thinking,
and to the incomparable power and eloquence with which he expounded and
enforced it. Like all epoch-making works, the _Novum Organum_ gave
expression to ideas which were already beginning to be in the air. The time
was ripe for a great change; scholasticism, long decaying, had begun to
fall; the authority not only of school doctrines but of the church had been
discarded; while here and there a few devoted experimenters were turning
with fresh zeal to the unwithered face of nature. The fruitful thoughts
which lay under and gave rise to these scattered efforts of the human mind,
were gathered up into unity, and reduced to system in the new philosophy of
Bacon.[95] It is assuredly little matter for wonder that this philosophy
should contain much that is now inapplicable, and that in many respects it
should be vitiated by radical errors. The details of the logical method on
which its author laid the greatest stress have not been found of practical
service;[96] yet the fundamental ideas on which the theory rested, the need
for rejecting rash generalization, and the necessity for a critical
analysis of experience, are as true and valuable now as they were then.
Progress in scientific discovery is made mainly, if not solely, by the
employment of hypothesis, and for that no code of rules can be laid down
such as Bacon had devised. Yet the framing of hypothesis is no mere random
guesswork; it is left not to the imagination alone, but to the _scientific
imagination_. There is required in the process not merely a preliminary
critical induction, but a subsequent experimental comparison, verification
or proof, the canons of which can be laid down with precision. To formulate
and show grounds for these laws is to construct a philosophy of induction,
and it must not be forgotten that the first step towards the accomplishment
of the task was made by Bacon when he introduced and gave prominence to the
powerful logical instrument of exclusion or elimination.

It is curious and significant that in the domain of the moral and
metaphysical sciences his influence has been perhaps more powerful, and his
authority has been more frequently appealed to, than in that of the
physical. This is due, not so much to his expressed opinion that the
inductive method was applicable to all the sciences,[97] as to the
generally practical, or, one may say, [v.03 p.0151] _positive_ spirit of
his system. Theological questions, which had tortured the minds of
generations, are by him relegated from the province of reason to that of
faith. Even reason must be restrained from striving after ultimate truth;
it is one of the errors of the human intellect that it will not rest in
general principles, but must push its investigations deeper. Experience and
observation are the only remedies against prejudice and error. Into
questions of metaphysics, as commonly understood, Bacon can hardly be said
to have entered, but a long line of thinkers have drawn inspiration from
him, and it is not without justice that he has been looked upon as the
originator and guiding spirit of what is known as the empirical school.

_Bacon's Influence._--It is impossible within our limits to do more than
indicate the influence which Bacon's views have had on subsequent thinkers.
The most valuable and complete discussion of the subject is contained in T.
Fowler's edition of the _Novum Organum_ (introd. § 14). It is there argued
that, both in philosophy and in natural science, Bacon's influence was
immediate and lasting. Under the former head it is pointed out (i.) that
the fundamental principle of Locke's _Essay_, that all our ideas are
product of sensation and reflection, is briefly stated in the first
aphorism of the _Novum Organum_, and (ii.) that the whole atmosphere of
that treatise is characteristic of the _Essay_. Bacon is, therefore,
regarded by many as the father of what is most characteristic in English
psychological speculation. As he himself said, he "rang the bell which
called the wits together." In the sphere of ethics he is similarly regarded
as a forerunner of the empirical method. The spirit of the _De Augmentis_
(bk. vii.) and the inductive method which is discussed in the _Novum
Organum_ are at the root of all theories which have constructed a moral
code by an inductive examination of human consciousness and the results of
actions. Among such theories utilitarianism especially is the natural
result of the application to the phenomenon of conduct of the Baconian
experimental method. In this connexion, however, it is important to notice
that Hobbes, who had been Bacon's secretary, makes no mention of Baconian
induction, nor does he in any of his works make any critical reference to
Bacon himself. It would, therefore, appear that Bacon's influence was not
immediate.

In the sphere of natural science, Bacon's importance is attested by
references to his work in the writings of the principal scientists, not
only English, but French, German and Italian. Fowler (_op. cit._) has
collected from Descartes, Gassendi, S. Sorbière, Jean Baptiste du Hamel,
quotations which show how highly Bacon was regarded by the leaders of the
new scientific movement. Sorbière, who was by no means partial to things
English, definitely speaks of him as "celuy qui a le plus puissamment
solicité les interests de la physique, et excité le monde à faire des
expériences" (_Relation d'un voyage en Angleterre_, Cologne, 1666, pp.
63-64). It was, however, Voltaire and the encyclopaedists who raised Bacon
to the pinnacle of his fame in France, and hailed him as "le père de la
philosophie expérimentale" (_Lettres sur les Anglois_). Condillac, in the
same spirit, says of him, "personne n'a mieux connu que lui la cause de nos
erreurs." So the _Encyclopédie_, besides giving a eulogistic article
"Baconisme," speaks of him (in d'Alembert's preliminary discourse) as "le
plus grand, le plus universel, et le plus éloquent des philosophes." Among
other writers, Leibnitz and Huygens give testimony which is the more
valuable as being critical. Leibnitz speaks of Bacon as "divini ingenii
vir," and, like several other German authors, classes him with Campanella;
Huygens refers to his "bonnes méthodes." If, however, we are to attach
weight to English writers of the latter half of the 17th century, we shall
find that one of Bacon's greatest achievements was the impetus given by his
_New Atlantis_ to the foundation of the Royal Society (_q.v._). Dr Thomas
Sprat (1635-1713), bishop of Rochester and first historian of the society,
says that Bacon of all others "had the true imagination of the whole
extent" of the enterprise, and that in his works are to be found the best
arguments for the experimental method of natural philosophy (_Hist. of the
Royal Society_, pp. 35-36, and Thomas Tenison's _Baconiana_, pp. 264-266).
In this connexion reference should be made also to Cowley's _Ode to the
Royal Society_, and to Dr John Wallis's remarks in Hearne's _Preface to P.
Langtoft's Chronicle_ (appendix, num. xi.). Joseph Glanvill, in his
_Scepsis Scientifica_ (dedication) says, "Solomon's house in the _New
Atlantis_ was a prophetic scheme of the Royal Society"; and Henry Oldenburg
(_c._ 1615-1677), one of the first secretaries of the society, speaks of
the new eagerness to obtain scientific data as "a work begun by the single
care and conduct of the excellent Lord Verulam." Boyle, in whose works
there are frequent eulogistic references to Bacon, regarded himself as a
disciple and was indeed known as a second Bacon. The predominating
influence of Bacon's philosophy is thus clearly established in the
generation which succeeded his own. There is abundant evidence to show that
in the universities of Oxford and Cambridge (especially the latter) the new
spirit had already modified the old curricula. Bacon has frequently been
disparaged on the ground that his name is not mentioned by Sir Isaac
Newton. It can be shown, however, that Newton was not ignorant of Bacon's
works, and Dr Fowler explains his silence with regard to them on three
grounds: (1) that Bacon's reputation was so well established that any
definite mention was unnecessary, (2) that it was not customary at the time
to acknowledge indebtedness to contemporary and recent writers, and (3)
that Newton's genius was so strongly mathematical (whereas Bacon's great
weakness was in mathematics) that he had no special reason to refer to
Bacon's experimental principles.

If the foregoing examples are held sufficient to establish the influence of
Bacon on the intellectual development of his immediate successors, it
follows that the whole trend of typically English thought, not only in
natural science, but also in mental, moral and political philosophy, is the
logical fulfilment of Baconian principles. He argued against the tyranny of
authority, the vagaries of unfettered imagination and the academic aims of
unpractical dialectic; the vital energy and the reasoned optimism of his
language entirely outweigh the fact that his contributions to the stock of
actual scientific knowledge were practically inconsiderable. It may be
freely admitted that in the domain of logic there is nothing in the
_Organum_ that has not been more instructively analysed either by Aristotle
himself or in modern works; at the same time, there is probably no work
which is a better and more stimulating introduction to logical study. Its
terse, epigrammatic phrases sink into the fibre of the mind, and are a
healthy warning against crude, immature generalization.

While, therefore, it is a profound mistake to regard Bacon as a great
constructive philosopher, or even as a lonely pioneer of modern thought, it
is quite unfair to speak of him as a trifler. His great work consists in
the fact that he summed up the faults which the widening of knowledge had
disclosed in medieval thought, and in this sense he stands high among those
who were in many parts of 16th-century Europe striving towards a new
intellectual activity.

BIBLIOGRAPHY. _Editions._--The classical edition is that of R. L. Ellis, J.
Spedding and D. D. Heath, 1st ed., 1857; 2nd ed., 1870 (vols. i.-iii.,
philosophical writings; iv.-v., translations; vi.-vii., literary and
professional works). B. Montagu's edition (17 vols., 1825-1834) is full but
unscholarly. An extremely useful reprint (in one volume) of the
philosophical works (with a few not strictly philosophical), based on the
first Ellis-Spedding edition, was published by J. M. Robertson (London,
1905); besides the original introductions, it contains a useful summary by
the editor of the various problems of Bacon's life and thought. Numerous
cheap editions have lately been published, _e.g._ in the "World's Classics"
(1901), and "New Universal Library" series (1905); Sidney Lee, _English
Works of Francis Bacon_ (London, 1905).

Of particular works there are numerous editions in all the chief languages.
The following are the most important:--T. Fowler, _Novum Organum_ (Oxford,
1878; ed. 1889), with notes, full introduction on Bacon's philosophy in all
its relations, and a most valuable bibliography. This superseded the
edition of G. W. Kitchin (Oxford, 1855). The _Essays_ have been edited more
than twenty times since 1870; the following editions may be
mentioned:--Archbishop Whately (6th ed., 1864); W. Aldis Wright (Lond.,
1862); F. Storr and Gibson (Lond., 1886); E. A. Abbott (Lond., 1879); John
Buchan (Lond., 1879); A. S. West (Cambridge, 1897); W. Evans (Edinburgh,
1897). A facsimile reprint of the 1st edition was published in New York
(1904). _Advancement of Learning_:--W. Aldis [v.03 p.0152] Wright (Camb.,
1866; 5th ed., 1900); F. G. Selby (1892-1895); H. Morley (1905); and, with
the _New Atlantis_, in the "World's Classics" series (introduction by Prof.
T. Case, Lond., 1906). _Wisdom of the Ancients and New Atlantis_, in
"Cassell's National Library" (1886 and 1903). G. C. M. Smith, _New
Atlantis_ (1900). J. Fürstenhagen, _Kleinere Schriften_ (Leipzig, 1884).

_Biography._--J. Spedding, _The Life and Letters of Lord Bacon_ (1861),
_Life and Times of Francis Bacon_ (1878); also Dr Rawley's _Life_ in the
Ellis-Spedding editions, and J. M. Robertson's reprint (above); W. Hepworth
Dixon, _Personal History of Lord Bacon_ (Lond., 1861), and _Story of Lord
Bacon's Life_ (ib. 1862); John Campbell, _Lives of the Chancellors_ (Lond.,
1845), ii. 51; P. Woodward, _Early Life of Lord Bacon_ (1902); T. Fowler,
_Francis Bacon_ in "English Philos." series (Lond., 1881); R. W. Church's
_Bacon_, in "Men of Letters" series (1884).

_Philosophy._--Beside the introductions in the Ellis-Spedding and T. Fowler
editions, and general histories of philosophy, see:--Kuno Fischer, _Fr.
Bacon_ (1856, 2nd ed., 1875, Eng. trans. by John Oxenford, Lond., 1857);
Ch. de Rémusat, _Bacon, sa vie ... et son influence_ (1857, ed. 1858 and
1877); G. L. Craik, _Lord Bacon, his Writings and his Philosophy_ (3 vols.,
1846-1847, ed. 1860); A. Dorner, _De Baconis Philosophia_ (Berlin, 1867;
London, 1886); J. v. Liebig, _Über F. B. v. Verulam_ (Mannheim, 1863); Ad.
Lasson, _Über B. v. Verulam's wissenschaftliche Principien_ (Berl., 1860);
E. H. Böhmer, _Über F. B. v. Verulam_ (Erlangen, 1864); Ch. Adam, _Philos.
de Francis Bacon_ (Paris, 1890); Barthélemy St Hilaire, _Étude sur Francis
Bacon_ (Paris, 1890); R. W. Church, _op. cit._; H. Heussler, _F. Bacon und
seine geschichtliche Stellung_ (Breslau, 1889); H. Höffding, _History of
Modern Philosophy_ (Eng. trans., 1900); J. M. Robertson, _Short History of
Freethought_ (Lond., 1906); Sidney Lee, _Great Englishmen of the 16th
century_ (Lond., 1904). For the relations between Bacon and Ben Jonson see
_The Tale of the Shakespeare Epitaphs by Francis Bacon_ (New York, 1888);
for Bacon's poetical gifts see an article in the _Fortnightly Review_
(March 1905).

For the Bacon-Shakespeare controversy see SHAKESPEARE.

(R. AD.; J. M. M.)

[1] See _Nic. Eth._ iv. 3. 3. 1123b.

[2] "I wax now somewhat ancient; one-and-thirty years is a great deal of
sand in the hour-glass.... I ever bare a mind (in some middle place that I
could discharge) to serve her majesty; not as a man born under Sol, that
loveth honour; nor under Jupiter, that loveth business (for the
contemplative planet carrieth me away wholly); but as a man born under an
excellent sovereign, that deserveth the dedication of all men's
abilities.... Again the meanness of my estate doth somewhat move me; for
though I cannot accuse myself that I am either prodigal or slothful, yet my
health is not to spend, nor my course to get. Lastly, I confess that I have
as vast contemplative ends as I have moderate civil ends; for I have taken
all knowledge to be my province; and if I could purge it of two sorts of
rovers, whereof the one with frivolous disputations, confutations and
verbosities, the other with blind experiments and auricular traditions and
impostures, hath committed so many spoils, I hope I should bring in
industrious observations, grounded conclusions and profitable inventions
and discoveries--the best state of that province. This, whether it be
curiosity, or vain-glory, or nature, or (if one take it favourably)
_philanthropia_, is so fixed in my mind as it cannot be removed. And I do
easily see, that place of any reasonable commandment doth bring commandment
of more wits than of a man's own.

And if your lordship shall find now, or at any time, that I do seek or
affect any place whereunto any that is nearer to your lordship shall be
convenient, say then that I am a most dishonest man. And if your lordship
will not carry me on,... this I will do, I will sell the inheritance that I
have, and purchase some lease of quick revenue, or some office of gain that
shall be executed by deputy, and so give over all care of service, and
become some sorry bookmaker, or a true pioneer in that mine of
truth."--Spedding, _Letters and Life_, i. 108-109.

[3] Spedding, _Letters and Life_, i. 234-235, cf. i. 362. This letter, with
those to Puckering or Essex and the queen, i. 240-241, should be compared
with what is said of them by Macaulay in his _Essay_ on Bacon, and by
Campbell, _Lives_, ii. 287.

[4] See _Letters and Life_, i. 289, ii. 34.

[5] See Macaulay's Essay on Bacon.

[6] The whole story of Essex is given in Spedding's _Letters and Life_. It
is vigorously told by J. Bruce in the introduction to his _Correspondence
of James VI. with Sir Robert Cecil_ (Camden Society, 1861).

[7] See _Letters and Life_, iv. 177, vi. 38, vii. 116, 117.

[8] In October 1608 he became treasurer of Gray's Inn. The tercentenary was
celebrated in 1908.

[9] _Letters and Life_, iv. 380.

[10] _Ibid._ iv. 365-373.

[11] _Ibid._ iv. 375-378.

[12] _Ibid._ v. 81-83.

[13] Not to be confounded with any of those of the same name who held the
title of Baron St John of Bletsho (see _Dict. of Nat. Biog._ vol. 1. p. 150
_ad fin._).

[14] _Circa_ 1554-1616; educated at Cambridge; ordained priest 1581; vicar
of Ridge, Herts, 1581; rector of Hinton St George, Somerset, 1587;
eventually condemned to death at the Taunton Assizes (7th August 1615). The
sentence was not carried out, and Peacham is said to have died in gaol
(March 1616). See Gardiner's _Hist. of England_, ii. 272-283; _State
Trials_, ii. 869; _Calendar of State Papers_ (1603-1606); Hallam's
_Constitutional Hist._ i. 343; T. P. Taswell-Langmead, _English
Constitutional History_ (5th ed., 1896), p. 425. Nearly all works on
constitutional law and history discuss the case.

[15] _Letters and Life_, v. 101

[16] Ibid. v. 121, _n_.

[17] _Ibid_. v. 124.

[18] Macaulay's _Essay_.

[19] Campbell, _Lives_, ii. 344.

[20] The mysterious crimes supposed to be concealed under the obscure
details of this case have cast a shadow of vague suspicion on all who were
concerned in it. The minute examination of the facts by Spedding (_Letters
and Life_, v. 208-347) seems to show that these secret crimes exist nowhere
but in the heated imaginations of romantic biographers and historians.

[21] A somewhat similar case is that of the writ _De Rege inconsulto_
brought forward by Bacon. See _Letters and Life_, v. 233-236.

[22] _Ibid_. vi. 6, 7, 13-26, 27-56.

[23] Ibid. vi. 33.

[24] A position which Bacon in some respects approved. See _Essays_, "Of
Ambition." "It is counted by some a weakness in princes to have favourites;
but it is of all others the best remedy against ambitious great ones; for
when the way of pleasuring and displeasuring lieth by the favourite, it is
impossible any other should be over great."

[25] _Letters and Life_, vi. 278, 294-296, 313.

[26] _Ibid_. vii. 579-588, analysis of the case by D. D. Heath, who
expresses a strong opinion against Bacon's action in the matter.

[27] _Ibid_. vi. 444.

[28] For a full discussion of Bacon's connexion with the monopolies, see
Gardiner, _Prince Charles_, &c. ii. 355-373. For his opinion of monopolies
in general, see _Letters and Life_, vi. 49.

[29] _Letters and Life_, vii. 213: "I know I have clean hands and a clean
heart, and I hope a clean house for friends or servants. But Job himself,
or whosoever was the justest judge, by such hunting for matters against him
as hath been used against me, may for a time seem foul, specially in a time
when greatness is the mark and accusation is the game."

[30] _Ibid._ vii. 215-216.

[31] _Ibid._ vii. 225-226. From the letter to the king (March 25,
1621)--"When I enter into myself, I find not the materials of such a
tempest as is comen upon me. I have been (as your majesty knoweth best)
never author of any immoderate counsel, but always desired to have things
carried _suavibus modis_. I have been no avaricious oppressor of the
people. I have been no haughty or intolerable or hateful man in my
conversation or carriage. I have inherited no hatred from my father, but am
a good patriot born. Whence should this be? For these are the things that
use to raise dislikes abroad.... And for the briberies and gifts wherewith
I am charged, when the book of hearts shall be opened, I hope I shall not
be found to have the troubled fountain of a corrupt heart in a depraved
habit of taking rewards to pervert justice, howsoever I may be frail, and
partake of the abuse of the times."

[32] _Ibid._ vii. 227, and Gardiner, _Prince Charles_, &c. i. 450.

[33] _Letters and Life_, vii. 236, 238.

[34] _Ibid._ vii. 241.

[35] _Ibid._ vii. 242-244; "It resteth therefore that, without fig-leaves,
I do ingenuously confess and acknowledge, that having understood the
particulars of the charge, not formally from the House but enough to inform
my conscience and memory, I find matter sufficient and full, both to move
me to desert the defence, and to move your lordships to condemn and censure
me."

[36] _Ibid._ vii. 252-262.

[37] _Ibid._ vii. 261.

[38] _Ibid._ vii. 270.

[39] _Letters and Life_, vii. 235-236: "The first, of bargain and contract
for reward to pervert justice, _pendente lite_. The second, where the judge
conceives the cause to be at an end, by the information of the party or
otherwise, and useth not such diligence as he ought to inquire of it. And
the third, where the cause is really ended, and it is _sine fraude_ without
relation to any precedent promise.... For the first of them I take myself
to be as innocent as any born upon St Innocent's Day, in my heart. For the
second, I doubt on some particulars I may be faulty. And for the last, I
conceived it to be no fault, but therein I desire to be better informed,
that I may be twice penitent, once for the fact and again for the error."

[40] _Ibid._ vii. 242.

[41] _Ibid._ vii. 244: "Neither will your lordships forget that there are
_vitia temporis_ as well as _vitia hominis_, and that the beginning of
reformations hath the contrary power to the pool of Bethesda, for that had
strength to cure only him that was first cast in, and this hath commonly
strength to hurt him only that is first cast in."

[42] See, among many other passages, _Essays_, "Of Great Place ": "For
corruptions do not only bind thine own hands or thy servant's hands from
taking, but bind the hands of suitors also from offering; for integrity
used doth the one; but integrity professed, and with a manifest detestation
of bribery, doth the other; and avoid not only the fault but the
suspicion."

[43] Cf. _Letters and Life_, vii. 560: "I was the justest judge that was in
England these fifty years; but it was the justest censure in Parliament
that was these two hundred years."

[44] Or on the ground that there was a distinct rule forbidding chancellors
and the like officials to take presents. This does not seem to have been
the case, if we may judge from what Bacon says _Letters and Life_, vii.
233.

[45] Not only do the cases, so far as they are known, support Bacon's plea
of innocence, but it is remarkable that no attempt at a reversal of any of
his numerous decrees appears to have been successful. Had his decrees been
wilful perversions of justice, it is scarcely conceivable that some of them
should not have been overturned. See _Letters and Life_, vii. 555-562.

[46] The peculiarities of Bacon's style were noticed very early by his
contemporaries. (See _Letters and Life_, i. 268.) Raleigh and Jonson have
both recorded their opinions of it, but no one has characterized it more
happily than his friend, Sir Tobie Matthews, "A man so rare in knowledge,
of so many several kinds, endued with the facility and felicity of
expressing it all in so elegant, significant, so abundant, and yet so
choice and ravishing a way of words, of metaphors, of allusions, as perhaps
the world hath not seen since it was a world."--"Address to the Reader"
prefixed to _Collection of English Letters_ (1660).

[47] The division of the sciences adopted in the great French
_Encyclopédie_ was founded upon this classification of Bacon's. See
Diderot's _Prospectus (Oeuvres_, iii.) and d'Alembert's _Discours
(Oeuvres_, i.) The scheme should be compared with later attempts of the
same nature by Ampère, Cournot, Comte and Herbert Spencer.

[48] See also "Letter to Fulgentio," _Letters and Life_, vii. 533.

[49] _Fil. Lab._; _Cog. et Visa._ i.; cf. Pref. to _Ins. Mag._

[50] _Val. Ter._ 232; cf. _N. O._ i. 124.

[51] _Letters_, i. 123.

[52] _N. O._ i. 116.

[53] _Fil. Lab._ 5; cf. _N. O._ i. 81; _Val. Ter._ (_Works_, iii. 235);
_Advancement_, bk. i. (_Works_, iii. 294).

[54] _Fil. Lab._ 5; cf. _N. O._ i. 81; _Val. Ter._ (_Works_, iii. 222-233);
_New Atlantis (Works_, iii. 156).

[55] _N. O._ i. 116.

[56] _Ibid._ i. 124.

[57] _Ibid._ i. 6.

[58] The word _Idola_ is manifestly borrowed from Plato. It is used twice
in connexion with the Platonic Ideas (_N. O._ i. 23, 124) and is contrasted
with them as the false appearance. The [Greek: eidolon] with Plato is the
fleeting, transient image of the real thing, and the passage evidently
referred to by Bacon is that in the _Rep._ vii. 516 A, [Greek: kai prôton
men tas skias an rhaista kathorôiê, kai meta touto en tois hudasi ta te tôn
anthrôpôn kai ta tôn allôn eidôla, husteron de auta]. It is explained well
in the _Advancement_, bk. i. (_Works_, iii. 287). (For valuable notes on
the _Idola_, see T. Fowler's _Nov. Org._ i. 38 notes; especially for a
comparison of the _Idola_ with Roger Bacon's _Offendicula_.)

[59] _N. O._ i. 58.

[60] _N. O._ i. 79, 80, 98, 108.

[61] On the meaning of the word _form_ in Bacon's theory see also Fowler's
_N. O._ introd. § 8.

[62] _N. O._ ii. 1.

[63] This _better known in the order of nature_ is nowhere satisfactorily
explained by Bacon. Like his classification of causes, and in some degree
his notion of form itself, it comes from Aristotle. See _An. Post._ 71 b
33; _Topic_, 141 b 5; _Eth. Nic._ 1095 a 30. It should be observed that
many writers maintain that the phrase should be _notiora natura_; others,
_notiora naturae_. See Fowler's _N. O._ p. 199 note.

[64] _N. O._ ii. 17.

[65] _Ibid._ i. 51.

[66] _Ibid._ i. 75.

[67] _Ibid._ ii. 2.

[68] _Valerius Terminus_, iii. 228-229.

[69] Cf. _N. O._ ii. 27. Bacon nowhere enters upon the questions of how
such a science is to be constructed, and how it can be expected to possess
an independent method while it remains the mere receptacle for the
generalizations of the several sciences, and consequently has a content
which varies with their progress. His whole conception of _Prima
Philosophia_ should be compared with such a modern work as the _First
Principles_ of Herbert Spencer.

[70] It is to be noticed that this scale of nature corresponds with the
scale of ascending axioms.

[71] Cf. also for motions, _N. O._ ii. 48.

[72] The knowledge of final causes does not lead to works, and the
consideration of them must be rigidly excluded from physics. Yet there is
no opposition between the physical and final causes; in ultimate resort the
mind is compelled to think the universe as the work of reason, to refer
facts to God and Providence. The idea of final cause is also fruitful in
sciences which have to do with human action. (Cf. _De Aug._ iii. cc. 4, 5;
_Nov. Org._ i. 48, ii. 2.)

[73] _De Aug._ iii. 4. In the _Advancement (Works_, iii. 355) it is
distinctly said that they are not to be inquired into. One can hardly see
how the Baconian method could have applied to concrete substances.

[74] Thus the last step in the theoretical analysis gives the first means
for the practical operation. Cf. Aristotle, _Eth. Nic._ iii. 3. 12, [Greek:
to eschaton en têi analusei prôton einai en têi genesei]. Cf. also _Nov.
Org._ i. 103.

[75] _Cogitationes_ (_Works_, iii. 187).

[76] _N. O._ ii. 10.

[77] Pref. to _Instaur._ Cf. _Valerius Term._ (_Works_, iii. 224), and
_N. O._ i. 68, 124.

[78] Pref. to _Inst._

[79] Bacon's summary is valuable. "In the whole of the process which leads
from the senses and objects to axioms and conclusions, the demonstrations
which we use are deceptive and incompetent. The process consists of four
parts, and has as many faults. In the first place, the impressions of the
sense itself are faulty, for the sense both fails us and deceives us. But
its shortcomings are to be supplied and its deceptions to be corrected.
Secondly, notions are all drawn from the impressions of the sense, and are
indefinite and confused, whereas they should be definite and distinctly
bounded. Thirdly, the induction is amiss which infers the principles of
sciences by simple enumeration, and does not, as it ought, employ
exclusions and solutions (or separations) of nature. Lastly, that method of
discovery and proof according to which the most general principles are
first established, and then intermediate axioms are tried and proved by
them, is the parent of error and the curse of all science."--_N. O._ i. 69.

[80] _N. O._ i. 105.

[81] _Ibid._, i. 104; cf. i. 19-26.

[82] This extract gives an answer to the objection sometimes raised that
Bacon is not original in his theory of induction. He certainly admits that
Plato has used a method somewhat akin to his own; but it has frequently
been contended that his induction is nothing more than the [Greek: epagôgê]
of Aristotle (see Rémusat's _Bacon, &c._, pp. 310-315, and for a criticism,
Waddington, _Essais de Logique_, p. 261. sqq.) This seems a mistake. Bacon
did not understand by induction the argument from particulars to a general
proposition; he looked upon the exclusion and rejection, or upon
_elimination_, as the essence of induction. To this process he was led by
his doctrine of forms, of which it is the necessary consequence; it is the
infallible result of his view of science and its problem, and is as
original as that is. Whoever accepts Bacon's doctrine of cause must accept
at the same time his theory of the way in which the cause may be sifted out
from among the phenomena. It is evident that the Socratic search for the
essence by an analysis of instances--an induction ending in a
definition--has a strong resemblance to the Baconian inductive method.

[83] _N. O._ i. 105.

[84] That is to say, differing in nothing save the absence of the nature
under investigation.

[85] _Distrib. Op._ (_Works_, iv. 28); _Parasceve_ (_ibid._ 251, 252,
255-256); _Descrip. Glob. Intel._ ch. 3.

[86] _Works_, ii. 16; cf. _N. O._ i. 130.

[87] A Barnabite monk, professor of mathematics and philosophy at Annecy.

[88] _Letters and Life_, vii. 377.

[89] For a full discussion of Bacon's relation to his predecessors and
contemporaries, see Fowler's _N. O._ introd. § 13.

[90] Cf. what Bacon says, _N. O._ i. 130.

[91] Brewster, _Life of Newton_ (1855) (see particularly vol. ii. 403,
405); Lasson, _Über Bacon von Verulam's wissenschaftliche Principien_
(1860); Liebig, _Über Francis Bacon von Verulam_, &c. (1863). Although
Liebig points out how little science proceeds according to Bacon's rules,
yet his other criticisms seem of extremely little value. In a very
offensive and quite unjustifiable tone, which is severely commented on by
Sigwart and Fischer, he attacks the Baconian methods and its results. These
results he claims to find in the _Sylva Sylvarum_, entirely ignoring what
Bacon himself has said of the nature of that work (_N. O._ i. 117; cf.
Rawley's Pref. to the _S. S._), and thus putting a false interpretation on
the experiments there noted. It is not surprising that he should detect
many flaws, but he never fails to exaggerate an error, and seems sometimes
completely to miss the point of what Bacon says. (See particularly his
remarks on _S. S._ 33, 336.) The method he explains in such a way as to
show he has not a glimpse of its true nature. He brings against Bacon, of
all men, the accusations of making induction start from the undetermined
perceptions of the senses, of using imagination, and of putting a quite
arbitrary interpretation on phenomena. He crowns his criticism by
expounding what he considers to be the true scientific method, which, as
has been pointed put by Fischer, is simply that Baconian doctrine against
which his attack ought to have been directed. (See his account of the
method, _Über Bacon_, 47-49; K. Fischer, _Bacon_, pp. 499-502.)

[92] Mill, _Logic_, ii. pp. 115, 116, 329, 330.

[93] Whewell, _Phil. of Ind. Sc._ ii. 399, 402-403; Ellis, _Int. to Bacon's
Works_, i. 39, 61; Brewster, _Newton_, ii. 404; Jevons, _Princ. of Science_
ii. 220. A severe judgment on Bacon's method is given in Dühring's able but
one-sided _Kritische Gesch. d. Phil._, in which the merits of Roger Bacon
are brought prominently forward.

[94] Although it must be admitted that the Baconian method is fairly open
to the above-mentioned objections, it is curious and significant that Bacon
was not thoroughly ignorant of them, but with deliberate consciousness
preferred his own method. We do not think, indeed, that the _notiones_ of
which he speaks in any way correspond to what Whewell and Ellis would call
"conceptions or ideas furnished by the mind of the thinker"; nor do we
imagine that Bacon would have admitted these as necessary elements in the
inductive process. But he was certainly not ignorant of what may be called
a deductive method, and of a kind of hypothesis. This is clear from the use
he makes of the _Vindemiatio_, from certain hints as to the testing of
axioms, from his admission of the syllogism into physical reasoning, and
from what he calls _Experientia Literata_. The function of the
_Vindemiatio_ has been already pointed out; with regard to axioms, he says
(_N. O._ i. 106), "In establishing axioms by this kind of induction, we
must also examine and try whether the axiom so established be framed to the
measure of these particulars, from which it is derived, or whether it be
larger or wider. And if it be larger and wider, we must observe whether, by
indicating to us new particulars, it confirm that wideness and largeness as
by a collateral security, that we may not either stick fast in things
already known, or loosely grasp at shadows and abstract forms, not at
things solid and realized in matter." (Cf. also the passage from _Valerius
Terminus_, quoted in Ellis's note on the above aphorism.) Of the syllogism
he says, "I do not propose to give up the syllogism altogether. S. is
incompetent for the principal things rather than useless for the
generality. In the mathematics there is no reason why it should not be
employed. It is the flux of matter and the inconstancy of the physical body
which requires induction, that thereby it may be fixed as it were, and
allow the formation of notions well defined. In physics you wisely note,
and therein I agree with you, that after the notions of the first class and
the axioms concerning them have been by induction well made out and
defined, syllogism may be applied safely; only it must be restrained from
leaping at once to the most general notions, and progress must be made
through a fit succession of steps."--("Letter to Baranzano," _Letters and
Life_, vii. 377). And with this may be compared what he says of mathematics
(_Nov. Org._ ii. 8; _Parasceve_, vii.). In his account of _Experientia
Literata_ (_De Aug._ v. 2) he comes very near to the modern mode of
experimental research. It is, he says, the procedure from one experiment to
another, and it is not a science but an art or learned sagacity (resembling
in this Aristotle's [Greek: anchinoia]), which may, however, be enlightened
by the precepts of the _Interpretatio_. Eight varieties of such experiments
are enumerated, and a comparison is drawn between this and the inductive
method; "though the rational method of inquiry by the Organon promises far
greater things in the end, yet this sagacity, proceeding by learned
experience, will in the meantime present mankind with a number of
inventions which lie near at hand." (Cf. _N. O._ i. 103.)

[95] See the vigorous passage in Herschel, _Discourse on the Study of
Natural Philosophy_, § 105; cf. § 96 of the same work.

[96] Bacon himself seems to anticipate that the progress of science would
of itself render his method antiquated (_Nov. Org._ i. 130).

[97] _Nov. Org._ i. 127.

BACON, JOHN (1740-1799), British sculptor, was born in Southwark on the
24th of November 1740, the son of Thomas Bacon, a cloth-worker, whose
forefathers possessed a considerable estate in Somersetshire. At the age of
fourteen he was bound apprentice in Mr Crispe's manufactory of porcelain at
Lambeth, where he was at first employed in painting the small ornamental
pieces of china, but by his great skill in moulding he soon attained the
distinction of being modeller to the work. While engaged in the porcelain
works his observation of the models executed by different sculptors of
eminence, which were sent to be burned at an adjoining pottery, determined
the direction of his genius; he devoted himself to the imitation of them
with so much success that in 1758 a small figure of Peace sent by him to
the Society for the Encouragement of Arts received a prize, and the highest
premiums given by that society were adjudged to him nine times between the
years 1763 and 1776. During his apprenticeship he also improved the method
of working statues in artificial stone, an art which he afterwards carried
to perfection. Bacon first attempted working in marble about the year 1763,
and during the course of his early efforts in this art was led to improve
the method of transferring the form of the model to the marble (technically
"getting out the points") by the invention of a more perfect instrument for
the purpose. This instrument possessed many advantages above those formerly
employed; it was more exact, took a correct measurement in every direction,
was contained in a small compass, and could be used upon either the model
or the marble. In the year 1769 he was adjudged the first gold medal for
sculpture given by the Royal Academy, his work being a bas-relief
representing the escape of Aeneas from Troy. In 1770 he exhibited a figure
of Mars, which gained him the gold medal of the Society of Arts and his
election as A.R.A. As a consequence of this success he was engaged to
execute a bust of George III., intended for Christ Church, Oxford. He
secured the king's favour and retained it throughout life. Considerable
jealousy was entertained against him by other sculptors, and he was
commonly charged with ignorance of classic style. This charge he repelled
by the execution of a noble head of Jupiter Tonans, and many of his
emblematical figures are in perfect classical taste. He died on the 4th of
August 1799 and was buried in Whitfield's Tabernacle. His various
productions which may be studied in St Paul's cathedral, London, Christ
Church and Pembroke College, Oxford, the Abbey church, Bath, and Bristol
cathedral, give ample testimony to his powers. Perhaps his best works are
to be found among the monuments in Westminster Abbey.

See Richard Cecil, _Memoirs of John Bacon, R.A._ (London. 1801); and also
vol. i. of R. Cecil's works, ed. J. Pratt (1811).

BACON, LEONARD (1802-1881), American Congregational preacher and writer,
was born in Detroit, Michigan, on the 19th of February 1802, the son of
David Bacon (1771-1817), missionary among the Indians in Michigan and
founder of the town of Tallmadge, Ohio. The son prepared for college at the
Hartford (Conn.) grammar school, graduated at Yale in 1820 and at the
Andover Theological Seminary in 1823, and from 1825 until his death on the
24th of December 1881 was pastor of the First Church (Congregational) in
New Haven, Connecticut, occupying a pulpit which was one of the most
conspicuous in New England, and which had been rendered famous by his
predecessors, Moses Stuart and Nathaniel W. Taylor. In 1866, however,
though he was never dismissed by a council from his connexion with that
church, he gave up the active pastorate. He was, from 1826 to 1838, an
editor of the _Christian Spectator_ (New Haven); was one of the founders
(1843) of the _New Englander_ (later the _Yale Review_); founded in 1848
with Dr R. S. Storrs, Joshua Leavitt, Dr Joseph P. Thompson and Henry C.
Bowen, primarily to combat slavery extension, the _Independent_, of which
he was an editor until 1863; and was acting professor of didactic theology
in the theological department of Yale University from 1866 to 1871, and
lecturer on church polity and American church history from 1871 until his
death. Gradually, after taking up his pastorate, he gained greater and
greater influence in his denomination, until he came to be regarded as
perhaps the most prominent Congregationalist of his time, and was sometimes
popularly referred to as "The Congregational Pope of New England." In all
the heated theological controversies of the day, particularly the long and
bitter one concerning the views put forward by Dr Horace Bushnell, he was
conspicuous, using his influence to bring about harmony, and in the
councils of the Congregational churches, over two of which, the Brooklyn
councils of 1874 and 1876, he presided as moderator, he manifested great
ability both as a debater and as a parliamentarian. In his own theological
views he was broad-minded and an advocate of liberal orthodoxy. In all
matters concerning the welfare of his community or the nation, moreover, he
took a deep and constant interest, and was particularly identified with the
temperance and anti-slavery movements, his services to the latter
constituting probably the most important work of his life. In this, as in
most other controversies, he took a moderate course, condemning the
apologists and defenders of slavery on the one hand and the Garrisonian
extremists on the other. His _Slavery Discussed in Occasional Essays from
1833 to 1846_ (1846) exercised considerable influence upon Abraham Lincoln,
and in this book appears the sentence, which, as rephrased by Lincoln, was
widely quoted: "If that form of government, that system of social order is
not wrong--if those laws of the Southern States, by virtue of which slavery
exists there, and is what it is, are not wrong--nothing is wrong." He was
early attracted to the study of the ecclesiastical history of New England
and was frequently called upon to deliver commemorative addresses, some of
which were published in book and pamphlet form. Of these, his _Thirteen
Historical Discourses_ (1839), dealing with the history of New Haven, and
his _Four Commemorative Discourses_ (1866) may be especially mentioned. The
most important of his historical works, however, is his _Genesis of the New
England Churches_ (1874). He published _A Manual for Young Church Members_
(1833); edited, with a biography, the _Select Practical Writings of Richard
Baxter_ (1831); and was the author of a number of hymns, the best-known of
which is the one beginning,

 "O God, beneath Thy guiding hand
  Our exiled fathers crossed the sea."

There is no good biography, but there is much biographical material in the
commemorative volume issued by his congregation, _Leonard Bacon, Pastor of
the First Church in New Haven_ (New Haven, 1882), and there is a good
sketch in Williston Walker's _Ten New England Leaders_ (New York, 1901).

[v.03 p.0153] Leonard Bacon's sister DELIA BACON (1811-1859), born in
Tallmadge, Ohio, on the 2nd of February 1811, was a teacher in schools in
Connecticut, New Jersey and New York, and then, until about 1852, conducted
in various eastern cities, by methods devised by herself, classes for women
in history and literature. She wrote _Tales of the Puritans_ (1831), _The
Bride of Fort Edward_ (1839), based on the story of Jane McCrea, partly in
blank verse, and _The Philosophy of the Plays of Shakespeare Unfolded_
(1857), for which alone she is remembered. This book, in the preparation of
which she spent several years in study in England, where she was befriended
by Thomas Carlyle and especially by Nathaniel Hawthorne, was intended to
prove that the plays attributed to Shakespeare were written by a coterie of
men, including Francis Bacon, Sir Walter Raleigh and Edmund Spenser, for
the purpose of inculcating a philosophic system, for which they felt that
they themselves could not afford to assume the responsibility. This system
she professed to discover beneath the superficial text of the plays. Her
devotion to this one idea, as Hawthorne says, "had thrown her off her
balance," and while she was in England she lost her mind entirely. She died
in Hartford, Connecticut, on the 2nd of September 1859.

There is a biography by her nephew, Theodore Bacon, _Delia Bacon: A Sketch_
(Boston, 1888), and an appreciative chapter, "Recollections of a Gifted
Woman," in Nathaniel Hawthorne's _Our Old Home_ (Boston, 1863).

Leonard Bacon's son LEONARD WOOLSEY BACON (1830-1907), graduated at Yale in
1850, was pastor of various Congregational and Presbyterian churches, and
published _Church Papers_ (1876); _A Life Worth Living: Life of Emily Bliss
Gould_ (1878); _Irenics and Polemics and Sundry Essays in Church History_
(1895); _History of American Christianity_ (1898); and _The
Congregationalists_ (1904).

(W. WR.)