BACON, ROGER (_c._ 1214-_c._ 1294), English philosopher and man of science,
was born near Ilchester in Somerset. His family appears to have been in
good circumstances, but in the stormy reign of Henry III. their property
was despoiled and several members of the family were driven into exile.
Roger completed his studies at Oxford, though not, as current traditions
assert, at Merton or at Brasenose, neither of which had then been founded.
His abilities were speedily recognized by his contemporaries, and he
enjoyed the friendship of such eminent men as Adam de Marisco and Robert
Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln.

Very little is known of Bacon's life at Oxford; it is said he took orders
in 1233, and this is not improbable. In the following year, or perhaps
later, he crossed over to France and studied at the university of Paris,
then the centre of intellectual life in Europe. The two great orders,
Franciscans and Dominicans, were in the vigour of youth, and had already
begun to take the lead in theological discussion. Alexander of Hales was
the oracle of the Franciscans, while the rival order rejoiced in Albertus
Magnus and Thomas Aquinas.

The scientific training which Bacon had received, mainly from the study of
the Arab writers, showed him the manifold defects in the systems reared by
these doctors. Aristotle was known but in part, and that part was rendered
well-nigh unintelligible through the vileness of the translations; yet not
one of those professors would learn Greek. The Scriptures read, if at all,
in the erroneous versions were being deserted for the _Sentences_ of Peter
Lombard. Physical science, if there was anything deserving that name, was
cultivated, not by experiment in the Aristotelian way, but by arguments
deduced from premises resting on authority or custom. Everywhere there was
a show of knowledge concealing fundamental ignorance. Bacon, accordingly,
withdrew from the scholastic routine and devoted himself to languages and
experimental research. The only teacher whom he respected was a certain
Petrus de Maharncuria Picardus, or of Picardy, probably identical with a
certain mathematician, Petrus Peregrinus of Picardy, who is perhaps the
author of a MS. treatise, _De Magnete_, contained in the Bibliothèque
Impériale at Paris. The contrast between the obscurity of such a man and
[v.03 p.0154] the fame enjoyed by the fluent young doctors roused Bacon's
indignation. In the _Opus Minus_ and _Opus Tertium_ he pours forth a
violent tirade against Alexander of Hales, and another professor, not
mentioned by name, but spoken of as alive, and blamed even more severely
than Alexander. This anonymous writer,[1] he says, acquired his learning by
teaching others, and adopted a dogmatic tone, which has caused him to be
received at Paris with applause as the equal of Aristotle, Avicenna, or
Averroes.

Bacon, during his stay in Paris, acquired considerable renown. He took the
degree of doctor of theology, and seems to have received the complimentary
title of _doctor mirabilis_. In 1250 he was again at Oxford, and probably
about this time entered the Franciscan order. His fame spread at Oxford,
though it was mingled with suspicions of his dealings in the black arts and
with some doubts of his orthodoxy. About 1257, Bonaventura, general of the
order, interdicted his lectures at Oxford, and commanded him to place
himself under the superintendence of the body at Paris. Here for ten years
he remained under supervision, suffering great privations and strictly
prohibited from writing anything for publication. But his fame had reached
the ears of the papal legate in England, Guy de Foulques, who in 1265
became pope as Clement IV. In the following year he wrote to Bacon,
ordering him notwithstanding any injunctions from his superiors, to write
out and send to him a treatise on the sciences which he had already asked
of him when papal legate. Bacon, whose previous writings had been mostly
scattered tracts, _capitula quaedam_, took fresh courage from this command
of the pope. He set at naught the jealousy of his superiors and brother
friars, and despite the want of funds, instruments, materials for copying
and skilled copyists, completed in about eighteen months three large
treatises, the _Opus Majus_, _Opus Minus_ and _Opus Tertium_, which, with
some other tracts, were despatched to the pope. We do not know what opinion
Clement formed of them, but before his death he seems to have bestirred
himself on Bacon's behalf, for in 1268 the latter was permitted to return
to Oxford. Here he continued his labours in experimental science and also
in the composition of complete treatises. The works sent to Clement he
regarded as preliminaries, laying down principles which were afterwards to
be applied to the sciences. The first part of an encyclopaedic work
probably remains to us in the _Compendium Studii Philosophiae_ (1271). In
this work Bacon makes a vehement attack upon the ignorance and vices of the
clergy and monks, and generally upon the insufficiency of the existing
studies. In 1278 his books were condemned by Jerome de Ascoli, general of
the Franciscans, afterwards Pope Nicholas IV., and he himself was thrown
into prison for fourteen years. During this time, it is said, he wrote the
small tract _De Retardandis Senectutis Accidentibus_, but this is merely a
tradition. In 1292, as appears from what is probably his latest
composition, the _Compendium Studii Theologiae_, he was again at liberty.
The exact time of his death cannot be determined; 1294 is probably as
accurate a date as can be fixed upon.

_Works and Editions_.--Leland said that it is easier to collect the leaves
of the Sibyl than the titles of the works written by Roger Bacon; and
though the labour has been somewhat lightened by the publications of Brewer
and Charles, referred to below, it is no easy matter even now to form an
accurate idea of his actual productions. An enormous number of MSS. are
known to exist in British and French libraries, and probably not all have
yet been discovered. Many are transcripts of works or portions of works
already published and, therefore, require no notice.[2]

The works hitherto printed (neglecting reprints) are the following:--(1)
_Speculum Alchimiae_ (1541)--translated into English (1597); French, A
Poisson (1890); (2) _De Mirabili Potestate Artis et Naturae_
(1542)--English translation (1659); (3) _Libellus de Retardandis Senectutis
Accidentibus_ (1590)--translated as the "Cure of Old Age," by Richard Brown
(London, 1683); (4) _Sanioris Medicinae Magistri D. Rogeri Baconis Anglici
de Arte Chymiae Scripta_ (Frankfort, 1603)--a collection of small tracts
containing _Excerpta de Libra Avicennae de Anima_, _Breve Breviarium_,
_Verbum Abbreviatum,_[3] _Secretum Secretorum_, _Tractatus Trium Verborum_,
and _Speculum Secretorum_; (5) _Perspectiva_ (1614), which is the fifth
part of the _Opus Majus_; (6) _Specula Mathematica_, which is the fourth
part of the same; (7) _Opus Majus ad Clementem IV._, edited by S. Jebb
(1733) and J. H. Bridges (London, 1897); (8) _Opera hactenus Inedita_, by
J. S. Brewer (1859), containing the _Opus Tertium_, _Opus Minus_,
_Compendium Studii Philosophiae_ and the _De Secretis Operibus Naturae_;
(9) _De Morali Philosophia_ (Dublin, 1860, see below); (10) _The Greek
Grammar of R. Bacon and a Fragment of his Hebrew Grammar_, edited with
introduction and notes by E. S. Nolan and S. A. Hirsch (1902); (11)
_Metaphysica Fratris Rogeri_, edited by R. Steele, with a preface (1905);
(12) _Opera hactenus inedita_, by Robert Steele (1905).

How these works stand related to one another can only be determined by
internal evidence. The smaller works, chiefly on alchemy, are unimportant,
and the dates of their composition cannot be ascertained. It is known that
before the _Opus Majus_ Bacon had already written some tracts, among which
an unpublished work, _Computus Naturalium_, on chronology, belongs probably
to the year 1263; while, if the dedication of the _De Secretis Operibus_ be
authentic, that short treatise must have been composed before 1249.

It is, however, with the _Opus Majus_ that Bacon's real activity begins. It
has been called by Whewell at once the Encyclopaedia and the Organum of the
13th century.

Part I. (pp. 1-22), which is sometimes designated _De Utililate
Scientiarum_, treats of the four _offendicula_, or causes of error. These
are, authority, custom, the opinion of the unskilled many, and the
concealment of real ignorance with pretence of knowledge. The last error is
the most dangerous, and is, in a sense, the cause of all the others. The
_offendicula_ have sometimes been looked upon as an anticipation of Francis
Bacon's _Idola_, but the two classifications have little in common. In the
summary of this part, contained in the _Opus Tertium_, Bacon shows very
clearly his perception of the unity of science and the necessity of
encyclopaedic treatment.

Part II. (pp. 23-43) treats of the relation between philosophy and
theology. All true wisdom is contained in the Scriptures, at least
implicitly; and the true end of philosophy is to rise from the imperfect
knowledge of created things to a knowledge of the Creator. Ancient
philosophers, who had not the Scriptures, received direct illumination from
God, and only thus can the brilliant results attained by them be accounted
for.

Part III. (pp. 44-57) treats of the utility of grammar, and the necessity
of a true linguistic science for the adequate comprehension either of the
Scriptures or of books on philosophy. [v.03 p.0155] The necessity of
accurate acquaintance with any foreign language and of obtaining good
texts, is a subject Bacon is never weary of descanting upon. A translator
should know thoroughly the language he is translating from, the language
into which he is translating, and the subject of which the book treats.

Part IV. (pp. 57-255) contains an elaborate treatise on mathematics, "the
alphabet of philosophy," maintaining that all the sciences rest ultimately
on mathematics, and progress only when their facts can be subsumed under
mathematical principles. This fruitful thought he illustrates by showing
how geometry is applied to the action of natural bodies, and demonstrating
by geometrical figures certain laws of physical forces. He also shows how
his method may be used to determine some curious and long-discussed
problems, such as the light of the stars, the ebb and flow of the tide, the
motion of the balance. He then proceeds to adduce elaborate and sometimes
slightly grotesque reasons tending to prove that mathematical knowledge is
essential in theology, and closes this section of his work with two
comprehensive sketches of geography and astronomy. That on geography is
particularly good, and is interesting as having been read by Columbus, who
lighted on it in Petrus de Alliaco's _Imago Mundi_, and was strongly
influenced by its reasoning.

Part V. (pp. 256-357) treats of perspective. This was the part of his work
on which Bacon most prided himself, and in it, we may add, he seems to owe
most to the Arab writers Kindi and Alhazen. The treatise opens with an able
sketch of psychology, founded upon, but in some important respects varying
from, Aristotle's _De Anima_. The anatomy of the eye is next described;
this is done well and evidently at first hand, though the functions of the
parts are not given with complete accuracy. Many other points of
physiological optics are touched on, in general erroneously. Bacon then
discusses vision in a right line, the laws of reflection and refraction,
and the construction of mirrors and lenses. In this part of the work, as in
the preceding, his reasoning depends essentially upon his peculiar view of
natural agents and their activities. His fundamental physical maxims are
matter and force; the latter he calls _virtus_, _species_, _imago agentis_,
and by numberless other names. Change, or any natural phenomenon, is
produced by the impression of a virtus or species on matter--the result
being the thing known. Physical action is, therefore, _impression_, or
transmission of force in lines, and must accordingly be explained
geometrically. This view of nature Bacon considered fundamental, and it
lies, indeed, at the root of his whole philosophy. To the short notices of
it given in the 4th and 5th parts of the _Opus Majus_, he subjoined two, or
perhaps three, extended accounts of it. We possess at least one of these in
the tract _De Multiplicatione Specierum_, printed as part of the _Opus
Majus_ by Jebb (pp. 358-444). We cannot do more than refer to Charles for
discussions as to how this theory of nature is connected with the
metaphysical problems of force and matter, with the logical doctrine of
universals, and in general with Bacon's theory of knowledge.

Part VI. (pp. 445-477) treats of experimental science, _domina omnium
scientiarum_. There are two methods of knowledge: the one by argument, the
other by experience. Mere argument is never sufficient; it may decide a
question, but gives no satisfaction or certainty to the mind, which can
only be convinced by immediate inspection or intuition. Now this is what
experience gives. But experience is of two sorts, external and internal;
the first is that usually called experiment, but it can give no complete
knowledge even of corporeal things, much less of spiritual. On the other
hand, in inner experience the mind is illuminated by the divine truth, and
of this supernatural enlightenment there are seven grades.

Experimental science, which in the _Opus Tertium_ (p. 46) is distinguished
from the speculative sciences and the operative arts in a way that forcibly
reminds us of Francis Bacon, is said to have three great prerogatives over
all other sciences:--(1) It verifies their conclusions by direct
experiment; (2) It discovers truths which they could never reach; (3) It
investigates the secrets of nature, and opens to us a knowledge of past and
future. As an instance of his method, Bacon gives an investigation into the
nature and cause of the rainbow, which is really a very fine specimen of
inductive research.

The seventh part of the _Opus Majus_ (_De Morali Philosophia_), not given
in Jebb's edition, is noticed at considerable length in the _Opus Tertium_
(cap. xiv.). Extracts from it are given by Charles (pp. 339-348).

As has been seen, Bacon had no sooner finished this elaborate work than he
began to prepare a summary to be sent along with it. Of this summary, or
_Opus Minus_, part has come down and is published in Brewer's _Op. Ined._
(313-389), from what appears to be the only MS. The work was intended to
contain an abstract of the _Opus Majus_, an account of the principal vices
of theology, and treatises on speculative and practical alchemy. At the
same time, or immediately after, Bacon began a third work as a preamble to
the other two, giving their general scope and aim, but supplementing them
in many points. The part of this work, generally called _Opus Tertium_, is
printed by Brewer (pp. 1-310), who considers it to be a complete treatise.
Charles, however, has given good grounds for supposing that it is merely a
preface, and that the work went on to discuss grammar, logic (which Bacon
thought of little service, as reasoning was innate), mathematics, general
physics, metaphysics and moral philosophy. He founds his argument mainly on
passages in the _Communia Naturalium_, which indeed prove distinctly that
it was sent to Clement, and cannot, therefore, form part of the
_Compendium_, as Brewer seems to think. It must be confessed, however, that
nothing can well be more confusing than the references in Bacon's works,
and it seems well-nigh hopeless to attempt a complete arrangement of them
until the texts have been collated and carefully printed.

All these large works Bacon appears to have looked on as preliminaries,
introductions, leading to a great work which should embrace the principles
of all the sciences. This great work, which is perhaps the
frequently-referred-to _Liber Sex Scientiarum_, he began, and a few
fragments still indicate its outline. First appears to have come the
treatise now called _Compendium Studii Philosophiae_ (Brewer pp. 393-519),
containing an account of the causes of error, and then entering at length
upon grammar. After that, apparently, logic was to be treated; then,
possibly, mathematics and physics; then speculative alchemy and
experimental science. It is, however, very difficult, in the present state
of our knowledge of the MSS., to hazard even conjectures as to the contents
and nature of this last and most comprehensive work.

Bacon's fame in popular estimation has always rested on his mechanical
discoveries. Careful research has shown that very little can with accuracy
be ascribed to him. He certainly describes a method of constructing a
telescope, but not so as to lead one to conclude that he was in possession
of that instrument. Burning-glasses were in common use, and spectacles it
does not appear he made, although he was probably acquainted with the
principle of their construction. His wonderful predictions (in the _De
Secretis_) must be taken _cum grano salis_; he believed in astrology, in
the doctrine of signatures, and in the philosopher's stone, and _knew_ that
the circle had been squared. For his work in connexion with gunpowder, the
invention of which has been claimed for him on the ground of a passage in
his _De mirabili potestate artis et naturae_, see GUNPOWDER.

_Summary._--The 13th century, an age peculiarly rich in great men, produced
few, if any, who can take higher rank than Roger Bacon. He is in every way
worthy to be placed beside Albertus Magnus, Bonaventura, and Thomas
Aquinas. These had an infinitely wider renown in their day, but modern
criticism has restored the balance in his favour, and is even in danger of
erring in the opposite direction. Bacon, it is now said, was not
appreciated by his age because he was in advance of it; he is no schoolman,
but a modern thinker, whose conceptions of science are more just and clear
than are even those of his more celebrated namesake.[4] In this view there
is certainly some truth, but it is much exaggerated. As a general rule, no
man can be completely dissevered from his national antecedents and [v.03
p.0156] surroundings, and Bacon is not an exception. Those who take up such
an extreme position regarding his merits have known too little of the state
of contemporary science, and have limited their comparison to the works of
the scholastic theologians. We never find in Bacon himself any
consciousness of originality; he is rather a keen and systematic thinker,
working in a well-beaten track, from which his contemporaries were being
drawn by theology and metaphysics.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The best work on Roger Bacon is perhaps that of E. Charles,
_Roger Bacon, sa vie, ses ouvrages, ses doctrines d'après des textes
inédits_ (1861). Against the somewhat enthusiastic estimate and modern
interpretation given in this work, are Schneider in his _Roger Bacon, Eine
Monographie_ (Augsburg, 1873); K. Werner, _Die Psychol. ... des Roger
Bacon_ and _Die Kosmologie ... des Roger Bacon_ (Vienna, 1879); S. A.
Hirsch, _Early English Hebraists_ (1899); _Book of Essays_ (London, 1905),
deals with Bacon as a Hebraist. The new matter contained in the
publications of Charles and Brewer was summarized by H. Siebert, _Roger
Bacon: Inaugural Dissertation_ (Marburg, 1861). Cf. also J. K. Ingram, _On
the Opus Majus of Bacon_ (Dublin, 1858); Cousin, "Fragments phil. du moyen
âge" (reprinted from _Journal des savans_, 1848); E. Saisset, "Précurseurs
et disciples de Descartes," pp. 1-58 (reprinted from _Revue de deux
mondes_, 1861); K. Prantl, _Gesch. der Logik_, iii. 120-129 (a severe
criticism of Bacon's logical doctrines); Held, _Roger Bacon's praktische
Philosophie_ (Jena, 1881); Karl Pohl, _Das Verhältniss d. Philos. zur
Theol. bei Roger Bacon_ (Neustrelitz, 1893); articles in _Westminster
Review_, lxxxi. 1 and 512; A. Parrot, _Roger Bacon et ses contemporains_
(1894); E. Fluegel, _Roger Bacons Stellung in d. Gesch. d. Philos._ (1902);
S. Vogl, _Die Physik Roger Bacos_ (1906). For the popular legend see
_Famous Historie of Fryer Bacon_ (London, 1615; reproduced in Thoms, _Early
Prose Romances_, iii.); R. Greene's _Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay_ (1587 or
1588), and in publication of the Percy Society, vol. xv. 1844, _A Piece of
Friar Bacon's Brazen Heade's Prophesie_ (1604). For Bacon as a classical
scholar see J. E. Sandys, _Hist. of Class. Schol._ (2nd ed., 1906), cxxxi.

(R. AD.; X.)

[1] Brewer thinks this unknown professor is Richard of Cornwall, but the
little we know of Richard is not in harmony with the terms in which he is
elsewhere spoken of by Bacon. Erdmann conjectures Thomas Aquinas, which is
extremely improbable, as Thomas was unquestionably not the first of his
order to study philosophy. Cousin and Charles think that Albertus Magnus is
aimed at, and certainly much of what is said applies with peculiar force to
him. But some things do not at all cohere with what is otherwise known of
Albert. It is worth pointing out that Brewer, in transcribing the passage
bearing on this (_Op. Ined._ p. 327), has the words _fratrum puerulus_,
which in his marginal note he interprets as applying to the Franciscan
order. In this case, of course, Albert could not be the person referred to,
as he was a Dominican. But Charles, in his transcription, entirely omits
the important word _fratrum_.

[2] The more important MSS. are:--(1) The extensive work on the fundamental
notions of physics, called _Communia Naturalium_, which is found in the
Mazarin library at Paris, in the British Museum, and in the Bodleian and
University College libraries at Oxford; (2) on the fundamental notions of
mathematics, _De Communibus Mathematicae_, part of which is in the Sloane
collection, part in the Bodleian; (3) _Baconis Physica_, contained among
the additional MSS. in the British Museum; (4) the fragment called _Quinta
Pars Compendii Theologiae_, in the British Museum; (5) the _Compendium
Studii Theologiae_, in the British Museum; (6) the logical fragments, such
as the _Summulae Dialectices_, in the Bodleian, and the glosses upon
Aristotle's physics and metaphysics in the library at Amiens. See Little,
_The Grey Friars in Oxford_ (1892).

[3] At the close of the _Verb. Abbrev._ is a curious note, concluding with
the words, "_ipse Rogerus fuit discipulus fratris Alberti!_"

[4] See Dühring, _Kritische Ges. d. Phil._ 192, 249-251.