BACTERIOLOGY. The minute organisms which are commonly called "bacteria"[1]
are also known popularly under other designations, _e.g._ "microbes,"
"micro-organisms," "microphytes," "bacilli," "micrococci." All these terms,
including the usual one of bacteria, are unsatisfactory; for "bacterium,"
"bacillus" and "micrococcus" have narrow technical meanings, and the other
terms are too vague to be scientific. The most satisfactory designation is
that proposed by Nägeli in 1857, namely "schizomycetes," and it is by this
term that they are usually known among botanists; the less exact term,
however, is also used and is retained in this article since the science is
commonly known as "bacteriology." The first part of this article deals with
the general scientific aspects of the subject, while a second part is
concerned with the medical aspects.

I. THE STUDY OF BACTERIA

The general advances which have been made of late years in the study of
bacteria are clearly brought to mind when we reflect that in the middle of
the 19th century these organisms were only known to a few experts and in a
few forms as curiosities of the microscope, chiefly interesting for their
minuteness and motility. They were then known under the name of
"animalculae," and were confounded with all kinds of other small organisms.
At that time nothing was known of their life-history, and no one dreamed of
their being of importance to man and other living beings, or of their
capacity to produce the profound chemical changes with which we are now so
familiar. At the present day, however, not only have hundreds of forms or
species been described, but our knowledge of their biology has so extended
that we have entire laboratories equipped for their study, and large
libraries devoted solely to this subject. Furthermore, this branch of
science has become so complex that the bacteriological departments of
medicine, of agriculture, of sewage, &c., have become more or less separate
studies.

[Sidenote: Definition.]

The schizomycetes or bacteria are minute vegetable organisms devoid of
chlorophyll and multiplying by repeated bipartitions. They consist of
single cells, which may be spherical, oblong or cylindrical in shape, or of
filamentous or other aggregates of cells. They are characterized by the
absence of ordinary sexual reproduction and by the absence of an ordinary
nucleus. In the two last-mentioned characters and in their manner of
division the bacteria resemble Schizophyceae (Cyanophyceae or blue-green
algae), and the two groups of Schizophyceae and Schizomycetes are usually
united in the class Schizophyta, to indicate the generally received view
that most of the typical bacteria have been derived from the Cyanophyceae.
Some forms, however, such as "Sarcina," have their algal analogues in
Palmellaceae among the green algae, while Thaxter's group of
Myxobacteriaceae suggests a relationship with the Myxomycetes. The
existence of ciliated micrococci together with the formation of
endospores--structures not known in the Cyanophyceae--reminds us of the
flagellate Protozoa, _e.g._ _Monas_, _Chromulina_. Resemblances also exist
between the endospores and the spore-formations in the Saccharomycetes, and
if _Bacillus inflatus_, _B. ventriculus_, &c., really form more than one
spore in the cell, these analogies are strengthened. Schizomycetes such as
_Clostridium_, _Plectridium_, &c., where the sporiferous cells enlarge,
bear out the same argument, and we must not forget that there are extremely
minute "yeasts," easily mistaken for Micrococci, and that yeasts
occasionally form only one spore in the cell.

Nor must we overlook the possibility that the endospore-formation in
non-motile bacteria more than merely resembles the development of
azygospores in the Conjugatae, and some Ulothricaceae, if reduced in size,
would resemble them. Meyer regards them as chlamydospores, and Klebs as
"carpospores" or possibly chlamydospores similar to the endospores of
yeast. [v.03 p.0157] The former also looks on the ordinary disjointing
bacterial cell as an oidium, and it must be admitted that since Brefeld's
discovery of the frequency of minute oidia and chlamydospores among the
fungi, the probability that some so-called bacteria--and this applies
especially to the branching forms accepted by some bacteriologists--are
merely reduced fungi is increased. Even the curious one-sided growth of
certain species which form sheaths and stalks--_e.g._ _Bacterium
vermiforme_, _B. pediculatum_--can be matched by Algae such as _Oocardium_,
_Hydrurus_, and some Diatoms. It is clear then that the bacteria are very
possibly a heterogeneous group, and in the present state of our knowledge
their phylogeny must be considered as very doubtful.

Nearly all bacteria, owing to the absence of chlorophyll, are saprophytic
or parasitic forms. Most of them are colourless, but a few secrete
colouring matters other than chlorophyll. In size their cells are commonly
about 0.001 mm. (1 micromillimetre or 1 µ) in diameter, and from two to
five times that length, but smaller ones and a few larger ones are known.
Some of the shapes assumed by the cells are shown in fig. 1.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Preparations showing various forms of bacteria and
the various types of cilia and their arrangement.

A. _Bacillus subtilis_, Cohn, and _Spirillum undula_, Ehrenb.
B. _Planococcus citreus_ (Menge) Migula.
C. _Pseudomonas pyocyanea_ (Gessard), Migula.
D. _P. macroselmis_, Migula.
E. _P. syncyanea_ (Ehrenb.), Migula.
F. _Bacillus typhi_, Gaffky.
G. _B. vulgaris_ (Hauser), Migula.
H. _Microspira Comma_ (Koch), Schroeter.
J, K. _Spirillum rubrum_, Esmarsch.
L, M. _S. undula_ (Müller), Ehrenb. (_All after Migula._) ]

[Sidenote: Distribution in Time.]

That bacteria have existed from very early periods is clear from their
presence in fossils; and although we cannot accept all the conclusions
drawn from the imperfect records of the rocks, and may dismiss as absurd
the statements that geologically immured forms have been found still
living, the researches of Renault and van Tieghem have shown pretty clearly
that large numbers of bacteria existed in Carboniferous and Devonian times,
and probably earlier.

[Sidenote: Distribution in Space.]

Schizomycetes are ubiquitous as saprophytes in still ponds and ditches, in
running streams and rivers, and in the sea, and especially in drains, bogs,
refuse heaps, and in the soil, and wherever organic infusions are allowed
to stand for a short time. Any liquid (blood, urine, milk, beer, &c.)
containing organic matter, or any solid food-stuff (meat preserves,
vegetables, &c.), allowed to stand exposed to the air soon swarms with
bacteria, if moisture is present and the temperature not abnormal. Though
they occur all the world over in the space, air and on the surface of
exposed bodies, it is not to be supposed that they are by any means equally
distributed, and it is questionable whether the bacteria suspended in the
air ever exist in such enormous quantities as was once believed. The
evidence to hand shows that on heights and in open country, especially in
the north, there may be few or even no Schizomycetes detected in the air,
and even in towns their distribution varies greatly; sometimes they appear
to exist in minute clouds, as it were, with interspaces devoid of any, but
in laboratories and closed spaces where their cultivation has been promoted
the air may be considerably laden with them. Of course the distribution of
bodies so light and small is easily influenced by movements, rain, wind,
changes of temperature, &c. As parasites, certain Schizomycetes inhabit and
prey upon the organs of man and animals in varying degrees, and the
conditions for their growth and distribution are then very complex. Plants
appear to be less subject to their attacks--possibly, as has been
suggested, because the acid fluids of the higher vegetable organisms are
less suited for the development of Schizomycetes; nevertheless some are
known to be parasitic on plants. Schizomycetes exist in every part of the
alimentary canal of animals, except, perhaps, where acid secretions
prevail; these are by no means necessarily harmful, though, by destroying
the teeth for instance, certain forms may incidentally be the forerunners
of damage which they do not directly cause.

[Sidenote: History.]

Little was known about these extremely minute organisms before 1860. A. van
Leeuwenhoek figured bacteria as far back as the 17th century, and O. F.
Müller knew several important forms in 1773, while Ehrenberg in 1830 had
advanced to the commencement of a scientific separation and grouping of
them, and in 1838 had proposed at least sixteen species, distributing them
into four genera. Our modern more accurate though still fragmentary
knowledge of the forms of Schizomycetes, however, dates from F. J. Conn's
brilliant researches, the chief results of which were published at various
periods between 1853 and 1872; Cohn's classification of the bacteria,
published in 1872 and extended in 1875, has in fact dominated the study of
these organisms almost ever since. He proceeded in the main on the
assumption that the forms of bacteria as met with and described by him are
practically constant, at any rate within limits which are not wide:
observing that a minute spherical micrococcus or a rod-like bacillus
regularly produced similar micrococci and bacilli respectively, he based
his classification on what may be considered the constancy of forms which
he called species and genera. As to the constancy of form, however, Cohn
maintained certain reservations which have been ignored by some of his
followers. The fact that Schizomycetes produce spores appeals to have been
discovered by Cohn in 1857, though it was expressed dubiously in 1872;
these spores had no doubt been observed previously. In 1876, however, Cohn
had seen the spores germinate, and Koch, Brefeld, Pratzmowski, van Tieghem,
de Bary and others confirmed the discovery in various species.

The supposed constancy of forms in Cohn's species and genera received a
shock when Lankester in 1873 pointed out that his _Bacterium rubescens_
(since named _Beggiatoa roseo-persicina_, Zopf) passes through conditions
which would have been described by most observers influenced by the current
doctrine as so many separate "species" or even "genera,"--that in fact
forms known as _Bacterium_, _Micrococcus_, _Bacillus_, _Leptothrix_, &c.,
occur as phases in one life-history. Lister put forth similar ideas about
the same time; and Billroth came forward in 1874 with the extravagant view
that the various bacteria are only different states of one and the same
organism which he called _Cocco-bacteria septica_. From that time the
question of the pleomorphism (mutability of shape) of the bacteria has been
hotly discussed: but it is now generally agreed that, while a [v.03 p.0158]
certain number of forms may show different types of cell during the various
phases of the life-history,[2] yet the majority of forms are uniform,
showing one type of cell throughout their life-history. The question of
species in the bacteria is essentially the same as in other groups of
plants; before a form can be placed in a satisfactory classificatory
position its whole life-history must be studied, so that all the phases may
be known. In the meantime, while various observers were building up our
knowledge of the morphology of bacteria, others were laying the foundation
of what is known of the relations of these organisms to fermentation and
disease--that ancient will-o'-the-wisp "spontaneous generation" being
revived by the way. When Pasteur in 1857 showed that the lactic
fermentation depends on the presence of an organism, it was already known
from the researches of Schwann (1837) and Helmholtz (1843) that
fermentation and putrefaction are intimately connected with the presence of
organisms derived from the air, and that the preservation of putrescible
substances depends on this principle. In 1862 Pasteur placed it beyond
reasonable doubt that the ammoniacal fermentation of urea is due to the
action of a minute Schizomycete; in 1864 this was confirmed by van Tieghem,
and in 1874 by Cohn, who named the organism _Micrococcus ureae_. Pasteur
and Cohn also pointed out that putrefaction is but a special case of
fermentation, and before 1872 the doctrines of Pasteur were established
with respect to Schizomycetes. Meanwhile two branches of inquiry had
arisen, so to speak, from the above. In the first place, the ancient
question of "spontaneous generation" received fresh impetus from the
difficulty of keeping such minute organisms as bacteria from reaching and
developing in organic infusions; and, secondly, the long-suspected
analogies between the phenomena of fermentation and those of certain
diseases again made themselves felt, as both became better understood.
Needham in 1745 had declared that heated infusions of organic matter were
not deprived of living beings; Spallanzani (1777) had replied that more
careful heating and other precautions prevent the appearance of organisms
in the fluid. Various experiments by Schwann, Helmholtz, Schultz,
Schroeder, Dusch and others led to the refutation, step by step, of the
belief that the more minute organisms, and particularly bacteria, arose _de
novo_ in the special cases quoted. Nevertheless, instances were adduced
where the most careful heating of yolk of egg, milk, hay-infusions, &c.,
had failed,--the boiled infusions, &c., turning putrid and swarming with
bacteria after a few hours.

In 1862 Pasteur repeated and extended such experiments, and paved the way
for a complete explanation of the anomalies; Cohn in 1872 published
confirmatory results; and it became clear that no putrefaction can take
place without bacteria or some other living organism. In the hands of
Brefeld, Burdon-Sanderson, de Bary, Tyndall, Roberts, Lister and others,
the various links in the chain of evidence grew stronger and stronger, and
every case adduced as one of "spontaneous generation" fell to the ground
when examined. No case of so-called "spontaneous generation" has withstood
rigid investigation; but the discussion contributed to more exact ideas as
to the ubiquity, minuteness, and high powers of resistance to physical
agents of the spores of Schizomycetes, and led to more exact ideas of
antiseptic treatments. Methods were also improved, and the application of
some of them to surgery at the hands of Lister, Koch and others has yielded
results of the highest value.

Long before any clear ideas as to the relations of Schizomycetes to
fermentation and disease were possible, various thinkers at different times
had suggested that resemblances existed between the phenomena of certain
diseases and those of fermentation, and the idea that a virus or contagium
might be something of the nature of a minute organism capable of spreading
and reproducing itself had been entertained. Such vague notions began to
take more definite shape as the ferment theory of Cagniard de la Tour
(1828), Schwann (1837) and Pasteur made way, especially in the hands of the
last-named savant. From about 1870 onwards the "germ theory of disease" has
passed into acceptance. P. F. O. Rayer in 1850 and Davaine had observed the
bacilli in the blood of animals dead of anthrax (splenic fever), and
Pollender discovered them anew in 1855. In 1863, imbued with ideas derived
from Pasteur's researches on fermentation, Davaine reinvestigated the
matter, and put forth the opinion that the anthrax bacilli caused the
splenic fever; this was proved to result from inoculation. Koch in 1876
published his observations on Davaine's bacilli, placed beyond doubt their
causal relation to splenic fever, discovered the spores and the saprophytic
phase in the life-history of the organism, and cleared up important points
in the whole question (figs. 7 and 9). In 1870 Pasteur had proved that a
disease of silkworms was due to an organism of the nature of a bacterium;
and in 1871 Oertel showed that a _Micrococcus_ already known to exist in
diphtheria is intimately concerned in producing that disease. In 1872,
therefore, Cohn was already justified in grouping together a number of
"pathogenous" Schizomycetes. Thus arose the foundations of the modern "germ
theory of disease;" and, in the midst of the wildest conjectures and the
worst of logic, a nucleus of facts was won, which has since grown, and is
growing daily. Septicaemia, tuberculosis, glanders, fowl-cholera, relapsing
fever, and other diseases are now brought definitely within the range of
biology, and it is clear that all contagious and infectious diseases are
due to the action of bacteria or, in a few cases, to fungi, or to protozoa
or other animals.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--The various phases of germination of spores of
_Bacillus ramosus_ (Fraenkel), as actually observed in hanging drops under
very high powers.

A. The spore sown at 11 A.M., as shown at a, had swollen (b) perceptibly by
noon, and had germinated by 3.30 P.M., as shown at c: in d at 6 P.M., and e
at 8.30 P.M.; the resulting filament is segmenting into bacilli as it
elongates, and at midnight (f) consisted of twelve such segments.

B, C. Similar series of phases in the order of the small letters in each
case, and with the times of observation attached. At f and g occurs the
breaking up of the filament into rodlets.

D. Germinating spores in various stages, more highly magnified, and showing
the different ways of escape of the filament from the spore-membrane. (H.
M. W.) ]

Other questions of the highest importance have arisen from the foregoing.
About 1880 Pasteur first showed that _Bacillus anthracis_ cultivated in
chicken broth, with plenty of oxygen and at a temperature of 42-43° C.,
lost its virulence after a few "generations," and ceased to kill even the
mouse; Toussaint and Chauveau confirmed, and others have extended the
observations. More remarkable still, animals inoculated with such
"attenuated" bacilli proved to be curiously resistant to the deadly effects
of subsequent inoculations of the non-attenuated form. In other words,
animals vaccinated with the cultivated bacillus showed immunity from
disease when reinoculated with the deadly wild form. The questions as to
the causes and nature of the changes in the bacillus and in the host, as to
the extent of immunity enjoyed by the latter, &c., are of the greatest
interest and importance. These matters, however, and others such as
phagocytosis (first described by Metchnikoff in 1884), and the epoch-making
discovery of the opsonins of the blood by Wright, do not here concern us
(see II. below).

[Sidenote: Form and Structure.]

MORPHOLOGY.--_Sizes, Forms, Structure, &c._--The Schizomycetes consist of
single cells, or of filamentous or other groups of cells, according as the
divisions are completed at once or not. While some unicellular forms are
less than 1 µ (.001 mm.) in diameter, others have cells measuring 4 µ or 5
µ or even 7 µ or 8 µ, in thickness, while the length may vary from that of
the diameter to many times that measurement. In the filamentous forms the
individual cells are often difficult to observe until reagents are applied
(_e.g._ fig. 14), and the length of the rows of cylindrical cells may be
many hundred times greater than the breadth. Similarly, the diameters of
flat or spheroidal colonies may vary from a few times to many hundred
[Sidenote: Cell-wall.] times that of the individual cells, the divisions of
which have produced the colony. The shape of the individual cell (fig. 1)
varies from that of a minute sphere to that of a straight, curved, or
twisted filament or cylinder, which is not necessarily of the same diameter
throughout, and may have flattened, rounded, or even pointed ends. The rule
is that the cells divide in one direction only--_i.e._ transverse to the
long axis--and therefore produce aggregates of long cylindrical shape; but
in rarer cases iso-diametric cells divide in two or three directions,
producing flat, or spheroidal, or irregular colonies, the size of which is
practically unlimited. The bacterial [v.03 p.0159] cell is always clothed
by a definite cell-membrane, as was shown by the plasmolysing experiments
of Fischer and others. Unlike the cell-wall of the higher plants, it gives
usually no reactions of cellulose, nor is chitin present as in the fungi,
but it consists of a proteid substance and is apparently a modification of
the general protoplasm. In some cases, however, as in _B. tuberculosis_,
analysis of the cell shows a large amount of cellulose. The cell-walls in
some forms swell up into a gelatinous mass so that the cell appears to be
surrounded in the unstained condition by a clear, transparent space. When
the swollen wall is dense and regular in appearance the term "capsule" is
applied to the sheath as in _Leuconostoc_. Secreted pigments (red, yellow,
green and blue) are sometimes deposited in the wall, and some of the
iron-bacteria have deposits of oxide of iron in the membranes.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Types of Zoogloea. (After Zopf.)

A. Mixed zoogloea found as a pellicle on the surface of vegetable
infusions, &c.; it consists of various forms, and contains cocci (a) and
rodlets, in series (b and c), &c.

B. Egg-shaped mass of zoogloea of _Beggiatoa roseo-persicina_ (_Bacterium
rubescens_ of Lankester); the gelatinous swollen walls of the large crowded
cocci are fused into a common gelatinous envelope.

C. Reticulate zoogloea of the same.

D, E, H. Colonies of _Myconostoc_ enveloped in diffluent matrix.

F. Branched fruticose zoogloea of _Cladothrix_ (slightly magnified).

G. Zoogloea of _Bacterium merismopedioides_, Zopf, containing cocci
arranged in tablets.]

[Sidenote: Cell-contents.]

The substance of the bacterial cell when suitably prepared and stained
shows in the larger forms a mass of homogeneous protoplasm containing
irregular spaces, the vacuoles, which enclose a watery fluid. Scattered in
the protoplasm arc usually one or more deeply-staining granules. The
protoplasm itself may be tinged with colouring matter, bright red, yellow,
&c., and may occasionally contain substances other than the deeply-staining
granules. The occurrence of a starch-like substance which stains deep blue
with iodine has been clearly shown in some forms even where the bacterium
is growing on a medium containing no starch, as shown by Ward and others.
In other forms a substance (probably glycogen or amylo-dextrin) which turns
brown with iodine has been observed. Oil and fat drops have also been shown
to occur, and in the sulphur-bacteria numerous fine granules of sulphur.

[Sidenote: Nucleus.]

The question of the existence of a nucleus in the bacteria is one that has
led to much discussion and is a problem of some difficulty. In the majority
of forms it has not hitherto been possible to demonstrate a nucleus of the
type which is so characteristic of the higher plants. Attention has
accordingly been directed to the deeply-staining granules mentioned above,
and the term chromatin-granules has been applied to them, and they have
been considered to represent a rudimentary nucleus. That these granules
consist of a material similar to the chromatin of the nucleus of higher
forms is very doubtful, and the comparison with the nucleus of more highly
organized cells rests on a very slender basis. The most recent works
(Vejdovsky, Mencl), however, appear to show that nuclei of a structure and
mode of division almost typical are to be found in some of the largest
bacteria. It is possible that a similar structure has been overlooked or is
invisible in other forms owing to their small size, and that there may be
another type of nucleus--the diffuse nucleus--such as Schaudinn believed to
be the case in _B. butschlii_. Many bacteria when suspended in a fluid
exhibit a power of independent movement which is, of course, quite distinct
from the Brownian movement--a non-vital phenomenon common to all
finely-divided particles suspended in a fluid. Independent movement is
effected by special motile organs, the cilia or flagella. These structures
are invisible, with ordinary illumination in living cells or unstained
preparations, and can only be made clearly visible by special methods of
preparation and staining first used by Löffler. By these methods the cilia
are seen to be fine protoplasmic outgrowths of the cell (fig. 1) of the
same nature as those of the zoospores and antherozoids of algae, mosses,
&c. [Sidenote: Cilia.] These cilia appear to be attached to the cell-wall,
being unaffected by plasmolysis, but Fischer states that they really are
derived from the central protoplasm and pass through minute pores in the
wall. The cilia may be present during a short period only in the life of a
Schizomycete, and their number may vary according to the medium on which
the organism is growing. Nevertheless, there is more or less constancy in
the type of distribution, &c., of the cilia for each species when growing
at its best. The chief results may be summed up as follows: some species,
_e.g._ _B. anthracis_, have no cilia; others have only one flagellum at one
pole (_Monotrichous_), _e.g._ _Bacillus pyocyaneus_ (fig. 1, C, D), or one
at each pole; others again have a tuft of several cilia [v.03 p.0160] at
one pole (_Lophotrichous_), _e.g._ _B. syncyaneus_ (fig. 1, E), or at each
pole (_Amphitrichous_) (fig. 1, J, K, L); and, finally, many actively
motile forms have the cilia springing all round (_Peritrichous_), _e.g._
_B. vulgaris_ (fig. 1, G). It is found, however, that strict reliance
cannot be placed on the distinction between the _Monotrichous_,
_Lophotrichous_ and _Amphitrichous_ conditions, since one and the same
species may have one, two or more cilia at one or both poles; nevertheless
some stress may usually be laid on the existence of one or two as opposed
to several--_e.g._ five or six or more--at one or each pole.

[Sidenote: Vegetative State.]

In _Beggiatoa_, a filamentous form, peculiar, slow, oscillatory movements
are to be observed, reminding us of the movements of _Oscillatoria_ among
the _Cyanophyceae_. In these cases no cilia have been observed, and there
is a firm cell-wall, so the movement remains quite unexplained.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Types of Spore-formation in Schizomycetes. (After
Zopf.)

A. Various stages in the development of the endogenous spores in a
_Clostridium_--the small letters indicate the order.

B. Endogenous spores of the hay bacillus.

C. A chain of _cocci_ of _Leuconostoc mesenterioides_, with two "resting
spores," _i.e._ arthrospores. (After van Tieghem.)

D. A motile rodlet with one cilium and with a spore formed inside.

E. Spore-formation in _Vibrio_-like (c) and _Spirillum_-like (a b, a)
Schizomycetes.

F. Long rod-like form containing a spore (these are the so-called
"_Köpfchenbacterien_" of German authors).

G. _Vibrio_ form with spore. (After Prazmowski.)

H. _Clostridium_--one cell contains two spores. (After Prazmowski.)

I. _Spirillum_ containing many spores (a), which are liberated at b by the
breaking up of the parent cells.

K. Germination of the spore of the hay bacillus (_B. subtilis_)--the axis
of growth of the germinal rodlet is at right angles to the long axis of the
spore.

L. Germination of spore of _Clostridium butyricum_--the axis of growth
coincides with the long axis of the spore.]

While many forms are fixed to the substratum, others are free, being in
this condition either motile or immotile. The chief of these forms are
described below.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Characteristic groups of _Micrococci_. (After
Cohn.) A. _Micrococcus prodigiosus._ B. _M. vaccinae._ C. Zoogloea stage of
a _Micrococcus_, forming a close membrane on infusion--Pasteur's
_Mycoderma_. (Very highly magnified.)]

    _Cocci_: spherical or spheroidal cells, which, according to their
    relative (not very well defined) sizes are spoken of as _Micrococci_,
    _Macrococci_, and perhaps _Monas_ forms.

    _Rods_ or _rodlets_: slightly or more considerably elongated cells
    which are cylindrical, biscuit-shaped or somewhat fusiform. The
    cylindrical forms are short, _i.e._ only three or four times as long as
    broad (_Bacterium_), or longer (_Bacillus_); the biscuit-shaped ones
    are _Bacteria_ in the early stages of division. _Clostridia_, &c., are
    spindle-shaped.

    _Filaments_ really consist of elongated cylindrical cells which remain
    united end to end after division, and they may break up later into
    elements such as those described above. Such filaments are not always
    of the same diameter throughout, and their segmentation varies
    considerably. They may be free or attached at one (the "basal") end. A
    distinction is made between _simple_ filaments (_e.g._ _Leptothrix_)
    and such as exhibit a false branching (_e.g._ _Cladothrix_).

    _Curved_ and _spiral_ forms. Any of the elongated forms described above
    may be curved or sinuous or twisted into a corkscrew-like spiral
    instead of straight. If the sinuosity is slight we have the _Vibrio_
    form; if pronounced, and the spiral winding well marked, the forms are
    known as _Spirillum_, _Spirochaete_, &c. These and similar terms have
    been applied partly to individual cells, but more often to filaments
    consisting of several cells; and much confusion has arisen from the
    difficulty of defining the terms themselves.

    In addition to the above, however, certain Schizomycetes present
    aggregates in the form of plates, or solid or hollow and irregular
    branched colonies. This may be due to the successive divisions
    occurring in two or three planes instead of only across the long axis
    (_Sarcina_), or to displacements of the cells after division.

[Sidenote: Reproduction.]

_Growth and Division._--Whatever the shape and size of the individual cell,
cell-filament or cell-colony, the immediate visible results of active
nutrition are elongation of the cell and its division into two equal
halves, across the long axis, by the formation of a septum, which either
splits at once or remains intact for a shorter or longer time. This process
is then repeated and so on. In the first case the separated cells assume
the character of the parent-cell whose division gave rise to them; in the
second case they form filaments, or, if the further elongation and
divisions of the cells proceed in different directions, plates or
spheroidal or other shaped colonies. It not unfrequently happens, however,
that groups of cells break away from their former connexion as longer or
shorter straight or curved filaments, or as solid masses. In some
filamentous forms this "fragmentation" into multicellular pieces of equal
length or nearly so is a normal phenomenon, each partial filament repeating
the growth, division and fragmentation as before (cf. figs. 2 and 6). By
rapid division hundreds of thousands of cells may be produced in a few
hours,[3] and, according to the species and the conditions (the medium,
temperature, &c.), enormous collections of isolated cells may cloud the
fluid in which they are cultivated, or form deposits below or films on its
surface; valuable characters are sometimes obtained from these appearances.
When these dense "swarms" of vegetative cells become fixed in a matrix of
their own swollen contiguous cell-walls, they pass over into a sort of
resting state as a so-called zoogloea (fig. 3).

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--_Bacillus megaterium._ (After de Bary.)

a, a chain of motile rodlets still growing and dividing (_bacilli_).

b, a pair of bacilli actively growing and dividing.

p, a rodlet in this condition (but divided into four segments) after
treatment with alcoholic iodine solution.

c, d, e, f, successive stages in the development of the spores.

r, a rodlet segmented in four, each segment containing one ripe spore.

g1, g2, g3, early stages in the germination of the spores (after being
dried several days);

h1, h2, k, l and m, successive stages in the germination of the spore.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--_Bacillus anthracis_. (After Koch.)

A. _Bacilli_ mingled with blood-corpuscles from the blood of a guinea-pig;
some of the _bacilli_ dividing.

B. The rodlets after three hours' culture in a drop of aqueous humour. They
grow out into long _leptothrix_-like filaments, which become septate later,
and spores are developed in the segments.]

[Sidenote: Zoogloeae.]

One of the most remarkable phenomena in the life-history of the
Schizomycetes is the formation of this zoogloea stage, which corresponds to
the "palmella" condition of the lower _Algae_. This occurs as a membrane on
the surface of the medium, or as irregular clumps or branched masses
(sometimes several inches across) submerged in it, and consists of more or
less gelatinous matrix enclosing innumerable "cocci," "bacteria," or other
elements of the Schizomycete concerned. Formerly regarded as a distinct
genus--the natural fate of all the various [v.03 p.0161] forms--the
zoogloea is now known to be a sort of resting condition of the
Schizomycetes, the various elements being glued together, as it were, by
their enormously swollen and diffluent cell-walls becoming contiguous. The
zoogloea is formed by active division of single or of several mother-cells,
and the progeny appear to go on secreting the cell-wall substance, which
then absorbs many times its volume of water, and remains as a consistent
matrix, in which the cells come to rest. The matrix--_i.e._ the swollen
cell-walls--in some cases consists mainly of cellulose, in others chiefly
of a proteid substance; the matrix in some cases is horny and resistant, in
others more like a thick solution of gum. It is intelligible from the mode
of formation that foreign bodies may become entangled in the gelatinous
matrix, and compound zoogloeae may arise by the apposition of several
distinct forms, a common event in macerating troughs (fig. 3, A).
Characteristic forms may be assumed by the young zoogloea of different
species,--spherical, ovoid, reticular, filamentous, fruiticose, lamellar,
&c.,--but these vary considerably as the mass increases or comes in contact
with others. Older zoogloeae may precipitate oxide of iron in the matrix,
if that metal exists in small quantities in the medium. Under favourable
conditions the elements in the zoogloea again become active, and move out
of the matrix, distribute themselves in the surrounding medium, to grow and
multiply as before. If the zoogloea is formed on a solid substratum it may
become firm and horny; immersion in water softens it as described above.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Curve of growth of a filament of _Bacillus ramosus_
(Fraenkel), constructed from data such as in fig. 4. The abscissae
represent intervals of time, the ordinates the measured lengths of the
growing filament. Thus, at 2.33 P.M. the length of the filament was 6 µ; at
5.45, 20 µ; at 8 P.M., 70 µ and so on. Such curves show differences of
steepness according to the temperature (see temp. curve), and to
alterations of light (lamp) and darkness. (H. M. W.)]

[Sidenote: Measurement of growth.]

The growth of an ordinary bacterium consists in uniform elongation of the
rodlet until its length is doubled, followed by division by a median
septum, then by the simultaneous doubling in length of each daughter cell,
again followed by the median division, and so on (figs. 13, 14). If the
cells remain connected the resulting filament repeats these processes of
elongation and subsequent division uniformly so long as the conditions are
maintained, and very accurate measurements have been obtained on such a
form, _e.g._ _B. ramosus_. If a rodlet in a hanging drop of nutrient
gelatine is fixed under the microscope and kept at constant temperature, a
curve of growth can be obtained recording the behaviour during many hours
or days. The measured lengths are marked off on ordinates erected on an
abscissa, along which the times are noted. The curve obtained on joining
the former points then brings out a number of facts, foremost among which
are (1) that as long as the conditions remain constant the doubling
periods--_i.e._ the times taken by any portion of the filament to double
its length--are constant, because each cell is equally active along the
whole length; (2) there are optimum, minimum and maximum temperatures,
other conditions remaining constant, at which growth begins, runs at its
best and is soon exhausted, respectively; (3) that the most rapid
cell-division and maximum growth do not necessarily accord with the best
conditions for the life of the organism; and (4) that any sudden alteration
of temperature brings about a check, though a slow rise may accelerate
growth (fig. 8). It was also shown that exposure to light, dilution or
exhaustion of the food-media, the presence of traces of poisons or
metabolic products check growth or even bring it to a standstill; and the
death or injury of any single cell in the filamentous series shows its
effect on the curve by lengthening the doubling period, because its
potential progeny have been put out of play. Hardy has shown that such a
destruction of part of the filament may be effected by the attacks of
another organism.

[Sidenote: Spores.]

A very characteristic method of reproduction is that of spore-formation,
and these minute reproductive bodies, which represent a resting stage of
the organism, are now known in many forms. Formerly two kinds of spores
were described, _arthrospores_ and _endospores_. An arthrospore, however,
is not a true spore but merely an ordinary vegetative cell which separates
and passes into a condition of rest, and such may occur in forms which form
endospores, _e.g._ _B. subtilis_, as well as in species not known to form
endospores. The true spore or endospore begins with the appearance of a
minute granule in the protoplasm of a vegetative cell; this granule
enlarges and in a few hours has taken to itself all the protoplasm,
secreted a thin but very resistive envelope, and is a ripe ovoid spore,
smaller than the mother-cell and lying loosely in it (cf. figs. 6, 9, 10,
and 11). In the case of the simplest and most minute Schizomycetes [v.03
p.0162] (_Micrococcus_, &c.) no definite spores have been discovered; any
one of the vegetative micrococci may commence a new series of cell by
growth and division. We may call these forms "asporous," at any rate
provisionally.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.

A. _Bacillus anthracis._ (After de Bary) Two of the long filaments (B, fig.
10) in which spores are being developed. The specimen was cultivated in
broth, and spores are drawn a little too small--they should be of the same
diameter transversely as the segments.

B. _Bacillus subtilis._ (After de Bary.) 1, fragments of filaments with
ripe spores; 2-5, successive stages in the germination of the spores, the
remains of the spore attached to the germinal rodlets.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--_Bacillus subtilis_. (After Strasburger.) A.
Zoogloea pellicle. B. Motile rodlets. C. Development of spores.]

The spore may be formed in short or long segments, the cell-wall of which
may undergo change of form to accommodate itself to the contents. As a rule
only one spore is formed in a cell, and the process usually takes place in
a bacillar segment. In some cases the spore-forming protoplasm gives a blue
reaction with iodine solutions. The spores may be developed in cells which
are actively swarming, the movements not being interfered with by the
process (fig. 4, D). The so-called "Köpfchenbacterien" of older writers are
simply bacterioid segments with a spore at one end, the mother cell-wall
having adapted itself to the outline of the spore (fig. 4, F). The ripe
spores of Schizomycetes are spherical, ovoid or long-ovoid in shape and
extremely minute (_e.g._ those of _Bacillus subtilis_ measure 0.0012 mm.
long by 0.0006 mm. broad according to Zopf), highly refractive and
colourless (or very dark, probably owing to the high index of refraction
and minute size). The membrane may be relatively thick, and even exhibit
shells or strata.

The germination of the spores has now been observed in several forms with
care. The spores are capable of germination at once, or they may be kept
for months and even years, and are very resistant against desiccation, heat
and cold, &c. In a suitable medium and at a proper temperature the
germination is completed in a few hours. The spore swells and elongates and
the contents grow forth to a cell like that which produced it, in some
cases clearly breaking through the membrane, the remains of which may be
seen attached to the young germinal rodlet (figs. 5, 9 and 11); in other
cases the surrounding membrane of the spore swells and dissolves. The
germinal cell then grows forth into the forms typical for the particular
Schizomycete concerned.

The conditions for spore-formation differ. Anaerobic species usually
require little oxygen, but aerobic species a free supply. Each species has
an optimum temperature and many are known to require very special
food-media. The systematic interference with these conditions has enabled
bacteriologists to induce the development of so-called asporogenous races,
in which the formation of spores is indefinitely postponed, changes in
vigour, virulence and other properties being also involved, in some cases
at any rate. The addition of minute traces of acids, poisons, &c., leads to
this change in some forms; high temperature has also been used
successfully.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--Stages in the development of spores of _Bacillus
ramosus_ (Fraenkel), in the order and at the times given, in a hanging drop
culture, under a very high power. The process begins with the formation of
brilliant granules (A, B); these increase, and the brilliant substance
gradually balls together (C) and forms the spores (D), one in each segment,
which soon acquire a membrane and ripen (E). (H. M. W.)]

[Sidenote: Classification.]

The difficult subject of the classification[4] of bacteria dates from the
year 1872, when Cohn published his system, which was extended in 1875; this
scheme has in fact dominated the study of bacteria ever since. Zopf in 1885
proposed a scheme based on the acceptance of extreme views of pleomorphism;
his system, however, was extraordinarily impracticable and was recognized
by him as provisional only. Systems have also been brought forward based on
the formation of arthrospores and endospores, but as explained above this
is eminently unsatisfactory, as arthrospores are not true spores and both
kinds of reproductive bodies are found in one and the same form. Numerous
attempts have been made to construct schemes of classification based on the
power of growing colonies to liquefy gelatine, to secrete coloured
pigments, to ferment certain media with evolution of carbon dioxide or
other gases, or to induce pathological conditions in animals. None of these
systems, which are chiefly due to the medical bacteriologists, has
maintained its position, owing to the difficulty of applying the characters
and to the fact that such properties are physiological and liable to great
fluctuations in culture, because a given organism may vary greatly in such
respects according to its degree of vitality at the time, its age, the mode
of nutrition [v.03 p.0163] and the influence of external factors on its
growth. Even when used in conjunction with purely morphological characters,
these physiological properties are too variable to aid us in the
discrimination of species and genera, and are apt to break down at critical
periods. Among the more characteristic of these schemes adopted at various
times may be mentioned those of Miquel (1891), Eisenberg (1891), and
Lehmann and Neumann (1897). Although much progress has been made in
determining the value and constancy of morphological characters, we are
still in need of a sufficiently comprehensive and easily applied scheme of
classification, partly owing to the existence in the literature of
imperfectly described forms the life-history of which is not yet known, or
the microscopic characters of which have not been examined with sufficient
accuracy and thoroughness. [Sidenote: Fischer's Scheme.] The principal
attempts at morphological classifications recently brought forward are
those of de Toni and Trevisan (1889), Fischer (1897) and Migula (1897). Of
these systems, which alone are available in any practical scheme of
classification, the two most important and most modern are those of Fischer
and Migula. The extended investigations of the former on the number and
distribution of cilia (see fig. 1) led him to propose a scheme of
classification based on these and other morphological characters, and
differing essentially from any preceding one. This scheme may be tabulated
as follows:--

I. ORDER--HAPLOBACTERINAE. Vegetative body unicellular; spheroidal,
cylindrical or spirally twisted; isolated or connected in filamentous or
other growth series.

    1. _Family_--COCCACEAE. Vegetative cells spheroidal.

        (a) Sub-family--ALLOCOCCACEAE. Division in all or any planes,
        colonies indefinite in shape and size, of cells in short chains,
        irregular clumps, pairs or isolated:-- _Micrococcus_ (Cohn), cells
        non-motile; _Planococcus_ (Migula), cells motile.

        (b) Sub-family--HOMOCOCCACEAE. Division planes regular and
        definite:--_Sarcina_ (Goods.), cells non-motile; growth and
        division in three successive planes at right angles, resulting in
        packet-like groups; _Planosarcina_ (Migula), as before, but motile;
        _Pediococcus_ (Lindner), division planes at right angles in two
        successive planes, and cells in tablets of four or more;
        _Streptococcus_ (Billr.), divisions in one plane only, resulting in
        chains of cells.

    2. _Family_--BACILLACEAE. Vegetative cells cylindric (rodlets),
    ellipsoid or ovoid, and straight. Division planes always perpendicular
    to the long axis.

        (a) Sub-family--BACILLEAE. Sporogenous rodlets cylindric, not
        altered in shape:--_Bacillus_ (Cohn), non-motile; _Bactrinium_
        (Fischer), motile, with one polar flagellum (monotrichous);
        _Bactrillum_ (Fischer), motile, with a terminal tuft of cilia
        (lophotrichous); _Bactridium_ (Fischer), motile, with cilia all
        over the surface (peritrichous).

        (b) Sub-family--CLOSTRIDIEAE. Sporogenous rodlets,
        spindle-shaped:--_Clostridium_ (Prazm.), motile (peritrichous).

        (c) Sub-family--PLECTRIDIEAE. Sporogenous rodlets,
        drumstick-shaped:--_Plectridium_ (Fischer), motile (peritrichous).

    3. _Family_--SPIRILLACEAE. Vegetative cells, cylindric but curved more
    or less spirally. Divisions perpendicular to the long axis:--_Vibrio_
    (Müller-Löffler), comma-shaped,   motile, monotrichous; _Spirillum_
    (Ehrenb.), more strongly curved in open spirals, motile, lophotrichous;
    _Spirochaete_ (Ehrenb.), spirally coiled in numerous close turns,
    motile, but apparently owing to flexile movements, as no cilia are
    found.

II. ORDER--TRICHOBACTERINAE. Vegetative body of branched or unbranched
cell-filaments, the segments of which separate as swarm-cells (_Gonidia_).

    1. _Family_--TRICHOBACTERIACEAE. Characters those of the Order.

        (a) Filaments rigid, non-motile, sheathed:--_Crenothrix_ (Cohn),
        filaments unbranched and devoid of sulphur particles; _Thiothrix_
        (Winogr.), as before, but with sulphur particles; _Cladothrix_
        (Cohn), filaments branched in a pseudo-dichotomous manner.

        (b) Filaments showing slow pendulous and creeping movements, and
        with no distinct sheath:--_Beggiatoa_ (Trev.), with sulphur
        particles.

The principal objections to this system are the following:--(1) The
extraordinary difficulty in obtaining satisfactory preparations showing the
cilia, and the discovery that these motile organs are not formed on all
substrata, or are only developed during short periods of activity while the
organism is young and vigorous, render this character almost nugatory. For
instance, _B. megatherium_ and _B. subtilis_ pass in a few hours after
commencement of growth from a motile stage with peritrichous cilia, into
one of filamentous growth preceded by casting of the cilia. (2) By far the
majority of the described species (over 1000) fall into the three
genera--_Micrococcus_ (about 400), _Bacillus_ (about 200) and _Bactridium_
(about 150), so that only a quarter or so of the forms are selected out by
the other genera. (3) The monotrichous and lophotrichous conditions are by
no means constant even in the motile stage; thus _Pseudomonas rosea_ (Mig.)
may have 1, 2 or 3 cilia at either end, and would be distributed by
Fischer's classification between _Bactrinium_ and _Bactrillum_, according
to which state was observed. In Migula's scheme the attempt is made to
avoid some of these difficulties, but others are introduced by his
otherwise clever devices for dealing with these puzzling little organisms.

The question, What is an individual? has given rise to much difficulty, and
around it many of the speculations regarding pleomorphism have centred
without useful result. If a tree fall apart into its constituent cells
periodically we should have the same difficulty on a larger and more
complex scale. The fact that every bacterial cell in a species in most
cases appears equally capable of performing all the physiological functions
of the species has led most authorities, however, to regard it as the
individual--a view which cannot be consistent in those cases where a simple
or branched filamentous series exhibits differences between free apex and
fixed base and so forth. It may be doubted whether the discussion is
profitable, though it appears necessary in some cases--_e.g._ concerning
pleomorphy--to adopt some definition of individual.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.

A. _Myxococcus digelatus_, bright red fructification occurring on dung.

B. _Polyangium primigenum_, red fructification on dog's dung.

C. _Chondromyces apiculatus_, orange fructification on antelope's dung.

D. Young fructification.

E. Single cyst germinating.

(A, B, after Quehl; C-E, after Thaxter.) From Strasburger's _Lehrbuch der
Botanik_, by permission of Gustav Fischer.]

_Myxobacteriaceae._--To the two divisions of bacteria, Haplobacterinae and
Trichobacterinae, must now be added a third division, Myxobacterinae. One
of the first members of this group, _Chondromyces crocatus_, was described
as long ago as 1857 by Berkeley, but its nature was not understood and it
was ascribed to the Hyphomycetes. In 1892, however, Thaxter rediscovered it
and showed its bacterial nature, founding for it and some allied forms the
group Myxobacteriaceae. Another form, which he described as _Myxobacter_,
was shown later to be the same as _Polyangium vitellinum_ described by Link
in 1795, the exact nature of which had hitherto been in doubt. Thaxter's
observations and conclusions were called in question by some botanists, but
his later observations and those of Baur have established firmly the
position of the group. The peculiarity of the group lies in the fact that
the bacteria form plasmodium-like aggregations and build themselves up into
sporogenous structures of definite form superficially similar to the cysts
of the Mycetozoa (fig. 12). Most of the forms in question are found growing
on the dung of herbivorous animals, but the bacteria occur not only in the
alimentary canal of the animal but also free in the air. The Myxobacteria
are most easily obtained by keeping at a temperature of 30-35° C. in the
dark dung which has lain exposed to the air for at least eight days. The
high temperature is favourable to the growth of the bacteria but [v.03
p.0164] inimical to that of the fungi which are so common on this
substratum.

[Sidenote: Function and life of bacteria.]

The discoveries that some species of nitrifying bacteria and perhaps
pigmented forms are capable of carbon-assimilation, that others can fix
free nitrogen and that a number of decompositions hitherto unsuspected are
accomplished by Schizomycetes, have put the questions of nutrition and
fermentation in quite new lights. Apart from numerous fermentation
processes such as rotting, the soaking of skins for tanning, the
preparation of indigo and of tobacco, hay, ensilage, &c., in all of which
bacterial fermentations are concerned, attention may be especially directed
to the following evidence of the supreme importance of Schizomycetes in
agriculture and daily life. Indeed, nothing marks the attitude of modern
bacteriology more clearly than the increasing attention which is being paid
to useful fermentations. The vast majority of these organisms are not
pathogenic, most are harmless and many are indispensable aids in natural
operations important to man.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--A series of phases of germination of the spore of
_B. ramosus_ sown at 8.30 (to the extreme left), showing how the growth can
be measured. If we place the base of the filament in each case on a base
line in the order of the successive times of observation recorded, and at
distances apart proportional to the intervals of time (8.30, 10.0, 10.30,
11.40, and so on) and erect the straightened-out filaments, the
proportional length of each of which is here given for each period, a line
joining the tips of the filaments gives the curve of growth. (H. M. W.)]

Fischer has proposed that the old division into saprophytes and parasites
should be replaced by one which takes into account other peculiarities in
the mode of nutrition of bacteria. The nitrifying, nitrogen-fixing,
sulphur- and iron-bacteria he regards as monotrophic, _i.e._ as able to
carry on one particular series of fermentations or decompositions only, and
since they require no organic food materials, or at least are able to work
up nitrogen or carbon from inorganic sources, he regards them as primitive
forms in this respect and terms them _Prototrophic_. They may be looked
upon as the nearest existing representatives of the primary forms of life
which first obtained the power of working up non-living into living
materials, and as playing a correspondingly important _rôle_ in the
evolution of life on our globe. The vast majority of bacteria, on the other
hand, which are ordinarily termed saprophytes, are _saprogenic_, _i.e._
bring organic material to the putrefactive state--or _saprophilous_, _i.e._
live best in such putrefying materials--or become _zymogenic_, _i.e._ their
metabolic products may induce blood-poisoning or other toxic effects
(facultative parasites) though they are not true parasites. These forms are
termed by Fischer _Metatrophic_, because they require various kinds of
organic materials obtained from the dead remains of other organisms or from
the surfaces of their bodies, and can utilize and decompose them in various
ways (_Polytrophic_) or, if monotrophic, are at least unable to work them
up. The true parasites--obligate parasites of de Bary--are placed by
Fischer in a third biological group, _Paratrophic_ bacteria, to mark the
importance of their mode of life in the interior of living organisms where
they live and multiply in the blood, juices or tissues.

[Sidenote: Nitrogen bacteria.]

When we reflect that some hundreds of thousands of tons of urea are daily
deposited, which ordinary plants are unable to assimilate until
considerable changes have been undergone, the question is of importance,
What happens in the meantime? In effect the urea first becomes carbonate of
ammonia by a simple hydrolysis brought about by bacteria, more and more
definitely known since Pasteur, van Tieghem and Cohn first described them.
Lea and Miquel further proved that the hydrolysis is due to an
enzyme--urase--separable with difficulty from the bacteria concerned. Many
forms in rivers, soil, manure heaps, &c., are capable of bringing about
this change to ammonium carbonate, and much of the loss of volatile ammonia
on farms is preventible if the facts are apprehended. The excreta of urea
alone thus afford to the soil enormous stores of nitrogen combined in a
form which can be rendered available by bacteria, and there are in addition
the supplies brought down in rain from the atmosphere, and those due to
other living débris. The researches of later years have demonstrated that a
still more inexhaustible supply of nitrogen is made available by the
nitrogen-fixing bacteria of the soil. There are in all cultivated soils
forms of bacteria which are capable of forcing the inert free nitrogen to
combine with other elements into compounds assimilable by plants. This was
long asserted as probable before Winogradsky showed that the conclusions of
M. P. E. Berthelot, A. Laurent and others were right, and that _Clostridium
pasteurianum_, for instance, if protected from access of free oxygen by an
envelope of aerobic bacteria or fungi, and provided with the carbohydrates
and minerals necessary for its growth, fixes nitrogen in proportion to the
amount of sugar consumed. This interesting case of symbiosis is equalled by
yet another case. The work of numerous observers has shown that the free
nitrogen of the atmosphere is brought into combination in the soil in the
nodules filled with bacteria on the roots of Leguminosae, and since these
nodules are the morphological expression of a symbiosis between the higher
plant and the bacteria, there is evidently here a case similar to the last.

As regards the ammonium carbonate accumulating in the soil from the
conversion of urea and other sources, we know from Winogradsky's researches
that it undergoes oxidation in two stages owing to the activity of the
so-called "nitrifying" bacteria (an unfortunate term inasmuch as
"nitrification" refers merely to a particular phase of the cycle of changes
undergone by nitrogen). It had long been known that under certain
conditions large quantities of nitrate (saltpetre) are formed on exposed
heaps of manure, &c., and it was supposed that direct oxidation of the
ammonia, facilitated by the presence of porous bodies, brought this to
pass. But research showed that this process of nitrification is dependent
on temperature, aeration and moisture, as is life, and that while
nitre-beds can infect one another, the process is stopped by sterilization.
R. Warington, J. T. Schloessing, C. A. Müntz and others had proved that
nitrification was promoted by some organism, when Winogradsky hit on the
happy idea of isolating the organism by using gelatinous silica, and so
avoiding the difficulties which Warington had shown to exist with the
organism in presence of organic nitrogen, owing to its refusal to nitrify
on gelatine or other nitrogenous media. Winogradsky's investigations
resulted in the discovery that two kinds of bacteria are concerned in
nitrification; one of these, which he terms the _Nitroso-bacteria_, is only
capable of bringing about the oxidation of the ammonia to nitrous acid, and
the astonishing result was obtained that [v.03 p.0165] this can be done, in
the dark, by bacteria to which only pure mineral salts--_e.g._ carbonates,
sulphates and chlorides of ammonium, sodium and magnesium--were added. In
other words these bacteria can build up organic matter from purely mineral
sources by assimilating carbon from carbon dioxide in the dark and by
obtaining their nitrogen from ammonia. The energy liberated during the
oxidation of the nitrogen is regarded as splitting the carbon dioxide
molecule,--in green plants it is the energy of the solar rays which does
this. Since the supply of free oxygen is dependent on the activity of green
plants the process is indirectly dependent on energy derived from the sun,
but it is none the less an astounding one and outside the limits of our
previous generalizations. It has been suggested that urea is formed by
polymerization of ammonium carbonate, and formic aldehyde is synthesized
from CO_2 and OH_2. The _Nitro-bacteria_ are smaller, finer and quite
different from the nitroso-bacteria, and are incapable of attacking and
utilizing ammonium carbonate. When the latter have oxidized ammonia to
nitrite, however, the former step in and oxidize it still further to nitric
acid. It is probable that important consequences of these actions result
from the presence of nitrifying bacteria in rotten stone, decaying bricks,
&c., where all the conditions are realized for preparing primitive soil,
the breaking up of the mineral constituents being a secondary matter. That
"soil" is thus prepared on barren rocks and mountain peaks may be concluded
with some certainty.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--Stages in the formation of a colony of a variety
of _Bacillus (Proteus) vulgaris_ (Hauser), observed in a hanging drop. At
11 A.M. a rodlet appeared (A); at 4 P.M. it had grown and divided and
broken up into eight rodlets (B); C shows further development at 8 P.M., D
at 9.30 P.M.--all under a high power. At E, F, and G further stages are
drawn, as seen under much lower power. (H. M. W.)]

In addition to the bacterial actions which result in the oxidization of
ammonia to nitrous acid, and of the latter to nitric acid, the reversal of
such processes is also brought about by numerous bacteria in the soil,
rivers, &c. Warington showed some time ago that many species are able to
reduce nitrates to nitrites, and such reduction is now known to occur very
widely in nature. The researches of Gayon and Dupetit, Giltay and Aberson
and others have shown, moreover, that bacteria exist which carry such
reduction still further, so that ammonia or even free nitrogen may escape.
The importance of these results is evident in explaining an old puzzle in
agriculture, viz. that it is a wasteful process to put nitrates and manure
together on the land. Fresh manure abounds in de-nitrifying bacteria, and
these organisms not only reduce the nitrates to nitrites, even setting free
nitrogen and ammonia, but their effect extends to the undoing of the work
of what nitrifying bacteria may be present also, with great loss. The
combined nitrogen of dead organisms, broken down to ammonia by putrefactive
bacteria, the ammonia of urea and the results of the fixation of free
nitrogen, together with traces of nitrogen salts due to meteoric activity,
are thus seen to undergo various vicissitudes in the soil, rivers and
surface of the globe generally. The ammonia may be oxidized to nitrites and
nitrates, and then pass into the higher plants and be worked up into
proteids, and so be handed on to animals, eventually to be broken down by
bacterial action again to ammonia; or the nitrates may be degraded to
nitrites and even to free nitrogen or ammonia, which escapes.

[Sidenote: Bacteria and Leguminosae.]

That the Leguminosae (a group of plants including peas, beans, vetches,
lupins, &c.) play a special part in agriculture was known even to the
ancients and was mentioned by Pliny (_Historia Naturalis_, viii). These
plants will not only grow on poor sandy soil without any addition of
nitrogenous manure, but they actually enrich the soil on which they are
grown. Hence leguminous plants are essential in all rotation of crops. By
analysis it was shown by Schulz-Lupitz in 1881 that the way in which these
plants enrich the soil is by increasing the nitrogen-content. Soil which
had been cultivated for many years as pasture was sown with lupins for
fifteen years in succession; an analysis then showed that the soil
contained more than three times as much nitrogen as at the beginning of the
experiment. The only possible source for this increase was the atmospheric
nitrogen. It had been, however, an axiom with botanists that the green
plants were unable to use the nitrogen of the air. The apparent
contradiction was explained by the experiments of H. Hellriegel and
Wilfarth in 1888. They showed that, when grown on sterilized sand with the
addition of mineral salts, the Leguminosae were no more able to use the
atmospheric nitrogen than other plants such as oats and barley. Both kinds
of plants required the addition of nitrates to the soil. But if a little
water in which arable soil had been shaken up was added to the sand, then
the leguminous plants flourished in the absence of nitrates and showed an
increase in nitrogenous material. They had clearly made use of the nitrogen
of the air. When these plants were examined they had small swellings or
nodules on their roots, while those grown in sterile sand without
soil-extract had no nodules. Now these peculiar nodules are a _normal_
characteristic of the roots of leguminous plants grown in ordinary soil.
The experiments above mentioned made clear for the first time the nature
and activity of these nodules. They are clearly the result of infection (if
the soil extract was boiled before addition to the sand no nodules were
produced), and their presence enabled the plant to absorb the free nitrogen
of the air.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--Invasion of leguminous roots by bacteria.

a, cell from the epidermis of root of Pea with "infection thread"
(zoogloea) pushing its way through the cell-walls. (After Prazmowski.)

b, free end of a root-hair of Pea; at the right are particles of earth and
on the left a mass of bacteria. Inside the hair the bacteria are pushing
their way up in a thin stream.

(From Fischer's _Vorlesungen über Bakterien_.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 16.

a, root nodule of the lupin, nat. size. (From Woromv.)

b, longitudinal section through root and nodule.

g, fibro-vascular bundle.

w, bacterial tissue. (After Woromv.)

c, cell from bacterial tissues showing nucleus and protoplasm filled with
bacteria.

d, bacteria from nodule of lupin, normal undegenerate form.

e and f, bacteroids from _Vicia villosa_ and _Lupinus albus_. (After
Morck.)

(From Fischer's _Vorlesungen über Bakterien_.)]

The work of recent investigators has made clear the whole process. In
ordinary arable soil there exist motile rod-like bacteria, _Bacterium
radicicola_. These enter the root-hairs of leguminous plants, and passing
down the hair in the form of a long, slimy (zoogloea) thread, penetrate the
tissues of the root. As a result the tissues become hypertrophied,
producing the well-known nodule. In the cells of the nodule the bacteria
multiply and develop, drawing material from their host. Many of the
bacteria exhibit curious involution forms ("bacteroids"), which are finally
broken down and their products absorbed by the plant. The nitrogen of the
air is absorbed by the nodules, being built up into the bacterial cell and
later handed on to the host-plant. It appears from the observations of Mazé
that the bacterium can even absorb free nitrogen when grown in cultures
[v.03 p.0166] outside the plant. We have here a very interesting case of
symbiosis as mentioned above. The green plant, however, always keeps the
upper hand, restricting the development of the bacteria to the nodules and
later absorbing them for its own use. It should be mentioned that different
genera require different races of the bacterium for the production of
nodules.

The important part that these bacteria play in agriculture led to the
introduction in Germany of a commercial product (the so-called "nitragin")
consisting of a pure culture of the bacteria, which is to be sprayed over
the soil or applied to the seeds before sowing. This material was found at
first to have a very uncertain effect, but later experiments in America,
and the use of a modified preparation in England, under the direction of
Professor Bottomley, have had successful results; it is possible that in
the future a preparation of this sort will be widely used.

The apparent specialization of these bacteria to the leguminous plants has
always been a very striking fact, for similar bacterial nodules are known
only in two or three cases outside this particular group. However,
Professor Bottomley announced at the meeting of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science in 1907 that he had succeeded in breaking down
this specialization and by a suitable treatment had caused bacteria from
leguminous nodules to infect other plants such as cereals, tomato, rose,
with a marked effect on their growth. If these results are confirmed and
the treatment can be worked commercially, the importance to agriculture of
the discovery cannot be overestimated; each plant will provide, like the
bean and vetch, its own nitrogenous manure, and larger crops will be
produced at a decreased cost.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--A plate-culture of a bacillus which had been
exposed for a period of four hours behind a zinc stencil-plate, in which
the letters C and B were cut. The light had to traverse a screen of water
before passing through the C, and one of aesculin (which filters out the
blue and violet rays) before passing the B. The plate was then incubated,
and, as the figure shows, the bacteria on the C-shaped area were all
killed, whereas they developed elsewhere on the plate (traces of the B are
just visible to the right) and covered it with an opaque growth. (H. M.
W.)]

[Sidenote: Cellulose-bacteria.]

Another important advance is in our knowledge of the part played by
bacteria in the circulation of carbon in nature. The enormous masses of
cellulose deposited annually on the earth's surface are, as we know,
principally the result of chlorophyll action on the carbon dioxide of the
atmosphere decomposed by energy derived from the sun; and although we know
little as yet concerning the magnitude of other processes of
carbon-assimilation--_e.g._ by nitrifying bacteria--it is probably
comparatively small. Such cellulose is gradually reconverted into water and
carbon dioxide, but for some time nothing positive was known as to the
agents which thus break up the paper, rags, straw, leaves and wood, &c.,
accumulating in cesspools, forests, marshes and elsewhere in such
abundance. The work of van Tieghem, van Senus, Fribes, Omeliansky and
others has now shown that while certain anaerobic bacteria decompose the
substance of the middle lamella--chiefly pectin compounds--and thus bring
about the isolation of the cellulose fibres when, for instance, flax is
steeped or "retted," they are unable to attack the cellulose itself. There
exist in the mud of marshes, rivers and cloacae, &c., however, other
anaerobic bacteria which decompose cellulose, probably hydrolysing it first
and then splitting the products into carbon dioxide and marsh gas. When
calcium sulphate is present, the nascent methane induces the formation of
calcium carbonate, sulphuretted hydrogen and water. We have thus an
explanation of the occurrence of marsh gas and sulphuretted hydrogen in
bogs, and it is highly probable that the existence of these gases in the
intestines of herbivorous animals is due to similar putrefactive changes in
the undigested cellulose remains.

[Sidenote: Sulphur bacteria.]

Cohn long ago showed that certain glistening particles observed in the
cells of _Beggiatoa_ consist of sulphur, and Winogradsky and Beyerinck have
shown that a whole series of sulphur bacteria of the genera _Thiothrix_,
_Chromatium_, _Spirillum_, _Monas_, &c., exist, and play important parts in
the circulation of this element in nature, _e.g._ in marshes, estuaries,
sulphur springs, &c. When cellulose bacteria set free marsh gas, the
nascent gas reduces sulphates--_e.g._ gypsum--with liberation of SH_2, and
it is found that the sulphur bacteria thrive under such conditions by
oxidizing the SH_2 and storing the sulphur in their own protoplasm. If the
SH_2 runs short they oxidize the sulphur again to sulphuric acid, which
combines with any calcium carbonate present and forms sulphate again.
Similarly nascent methane may reduce iron salts, and the black mud in which
these bacteria often occur owes its colour to the FeS formed. Beyerinck and
Jegunow have shown that some partially anaerobic sulphur bacteria can only
exist in strata at a certain depth below the level of quiet waters where
SH_2 is being set free below by the bacterial decompositions of vegetable
mud and rises to meet the atmospheric oxygen coming down from above, and
that this zone of physiological activity rises and falls with the
variations of partial pressure of the gases due to the rate of evolution of
the SH_2. In the deeper parts of this zone the bacteria absorb the SH_2,
and, as they rise, oxidize it and store up the sulphur; then ascending into
planes more highly oxygenated, oxidize the sulphur to SO_3. These bacteria
therefore employ SH_2 as their respiratory substance, much as higher plants
employ carbohydrates--instead of liberating energy as heat by the
respiratory combustion of sugars, they do it by oxidizing hydrogen
sulphide. Beyerinck has shown that _Spirillum desulphuricans_, a definite
anaerobic form, attacks and reduces sulphates, thus undoing the work of the
sulphur bacteria as certain de-nitrifying bacteria reverse the operations
of nitro-bacteria. Here again, therefore, we have sulphur, taken [v.03
p.0167] into the higher plants as sulphates, built up into proteids,
decomposed by putrefactive bacteria and yielding SH_2 which the sulphur
bacteria oxidize, the resulting sulphur is then again oxidized to SO_3 and
again combined with calcium to gypsum, the cycle being thus complete.

[Sidenote: Iron bacteria.]

Chalybeate waters, pools in marshes near ironstone, &c, abound in bacteria,
some of which belong to the remarkable genera _Crenothrix_, _Cladothrix_
and _Leptothrix_, and contain ferric oxide, _i.e._ rust, in their
cell-walls. This iron deposit is not merely mechanical but is due to the
physiological activity of the organism which, according to Winogradsky,
liberates energy by oxidizing ferrous and ferric oxide in its protoplasm--a
view not accepted by H. Molisch. The iron must be in certain soluble
conditions, however, and the soluble bicarbonate of the protoxide of
chalybeate springs seems most favourable, the hydrocarbonate absorbed by
the cells is oxidized, probably thus--

  2FeCO_3 + 3OH_2 + O = Fe_2(OH)_6 + 2CO_2.

The ferric hydroxide accumulates in the sheath, and gradually passes into
the more insoluble ferric oxide. These actions are of extreme importance in
nature, as their continuation results in the enormous deposits of bog-iron
ore, ochre, and--since Molisch has shown that the iron can be replaced by
manganese in some bacteria--of manganese ores.

[Sidenote: Pigment bacteria.]

Considerable advances in our knowledge of the various chromogenic bacteria
have been made by the studies of Beyerinck, Lankester, Engelmann, Ewart and
others, and have assumed exceptional importance owing to the discovery that
_Bacteriopurpurin_--the red colouring matter contained in certain sulphur
bacteria--absorbs certain rays of solar energy, and enables the organism to
utilize the energy for its own life-purposes. Engelmann showed, for
instance, that these red-purple bacteria collect in the ultra-red, and to a
less extent in the orange and green, in bands which agree with the
absorption spectrum of the extracted colouring matter. Not only so, but the
evident parallelism between this absorption of light and that by the
chlorophyll of green plants, is completed by the demonstration that oxygen
is set free by these bacteria--_i.e._ by means of radiant energy trapped by
their colour-screens the living cells are in both cases enabled to do work,
such as the reduction of highly oxidized compounds.

The most recent observations of Molisch seem to show that bacteria
possessing bacteriopurpurin exhibit a new type of assimilation--the
assimilation of organic material under the influence of light. In the case
of these red-purple bacteria the colouring matter is contained in the
protoplasm of the cell, but in most chromogenic bacteria it occurs as
excreted pigment on and between the cells, or is formed by their action in
the medium. Ewart has confirmed the principal conclusions concerning these
purple, and also the so-called chlorophyll bacteria (_B. viride_, _B.
chlorinum_, &c.), the results going to show that these are, as many
authorities have held, merely minute algae. The pigment itself may be
soluble in water, as is the case with the blue-green fluorescent body
formed by _B. pyocyaneus_, _B. fluorescens_ and a whole group of
fluorescent bacteria. Neelson found that the pigment of _B. cyanogenus_
gives a band in the yellow and strong lines at E and F in the solar
spectrum--an absorption spectrum almost identical with that of
triphenyl-rosaniline. In the case of the scarlet and crimson red pigments
of _B. prodigiosus_, _B. ruber_, &c., the violet of _B. violacens_, _B
janthinus_, &c., the red-purple of the sulphur bacteria, and indeed most
bacterial pigments, solution in water does not occur, though alcohol
extracts the colour readily. Finally, there are a few forms which yield
their colour to neither alcohol nor water, _e.g._ the yellow _Micrococcus
cereus flavus_ and the _B. berolinensis_. Much work is still necessary
before we can estimate the importance of these pigments. Their spectra are
only imperfectly known in a few cases, and the bearing of the absorption on
the life-history is still a mystery. In many cases the colour-production is
dependent on certain definite conditions--temperature, presence of oxygen,
nature of the food-medium, &c. Ewart's important discovery that some of
these lipochrome pigments occlude oxygen, while others do not, may have
bearings on the facultative anaerobism of these organisms.

[Sidenote: Dairy bacteria.]

A branch of bacteriology which offers numerous problems of importance is
that which deals with the organisms so common in milk, butter and cheese.
Milk is a medium not only admirably suited to the growth of bacteria, but,
as a matter of fact, always contaminated with these organisms in the
ordinary course of supply. F. Lafar has stated that 20% of the cows in
Germany suffer from tuberculosis, which also affected 17.7% of the cattle
slaughtered in Copenhagen between 1891 and 1893, and that one in every
thirteen samples of milk examined in Paris, and one in every nineteen in
Washington, contained tubercle bacilli. Hence the desirability of
sterilizing milk used for domestic purposes becomes imperative.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--A similar preparation to fig. 17, except that two
slit-like openings of equal length allowed the light to pass, and that the
light was that of the electric arc passed through a quartz prism and
casting a powerful spectrum on the plate. The upper slit was covered with
glass, the lower with quartz. The bacteria were killed over the clear areas
shown. The left-hand boundary of the clear area corresponds to the line F
(green end of the blue), and the beginning of the ultra-violet was at the
extreme right of the upper (short) area. The lower area of bactericidal
action extends much farther to the right, because the quartz allows more
ultra-violet rays to pass than does glass. The red-yellow-green to the left
of F were without effect. (H. M. W.) ]

No milk is free from bacteria, because the external orifices of the
milk-ducts always contain them, but the forms present in the normal fluid
are principally those which induce such changes as the souring or "turning"
so frequently observed in standing milk (these were examined by Lord Lister
as long ago as 1873-1877, though several other species are now known), and
those which bring about the various changes and fermentations in butter and
cheese made from it. The presence of foreign germs, which may gain the
upper hand and totally destroy the flavours of butter and cheese, has led
to the search for those particular forms to which the approved properties
are due. A definite bacillus to which the peculiarly fine flavour of
certain butters is due, is said to be largely employed in pure cultures in
American dairies, and in Denmark certain butters are said to keep fresh
much longer owing to the use of pure cultures and the treatment employed to
suppress the forms which cause rancidity. Quite distinct is the search for
the germs which cause undesirable changes, or "diseases"; and great strides
have been made in discovering the bacteria concerned in rendering milk
"ropy," butter "oily" and "rancid," &c. Cheese in its numerous forms
contains myriads of bacteria, and some of these are now known to be
concerned in the various processes of ripening and other changes affecting
the product, and although little is known as to the exact part played by
any species, practical applications of the discoveries of the decade
1890-1900 have been made, _e.g._ Edam cheese. The Japanese have cheeses
resulting from the bacterial fermentation of boiled Soja beans.

[v.03 p.0168]

[Sidenote: Thermophilous bacteria.]

That bacterial fermentations are accompanied by the evolution of heat is an
old experience; but the discovery that the "spontaneous" combustion of
sterilized cotton-waste does not occur simply if moist and freely exposed
to oxygen, but results when the washings of fresh waste are added, has led
to clearer proof that the heating of hay-stacks, hops, tobacco and other
vegetable products is due to the vital activity of bacteria and fungi, and
is physiologically a consequence of respiratory processes like those in
malting. It seems fairly established that when the preliminary heating
process of fermentation is drawing to a close, the cotton, hay, &c., having
been converted into a highly porous friable and combustible mass, may then
ignite in certain circumstances by the occlusion of oxygen, just as
ignition is induced by finely divided metals. A remarkable point in this
connexion has always been the necessary conclusion that the living bacteria
concerned must be exposed to temperatures of at least 70° C. in the hot
heaps. Apart from the resolution of doubts as to the power of spores to
withstand such temperatures for long periods, the discoveries of Miquel,
Globig and others have shown that there are numerous bacteria which will
grow and divide at such temperatures, _e.g._ _B. thermophilus_, from
sewage, which is quite active at 70° C., and _B. Ludwigi_ and _B.
ilidzensis_, &c., from hot springs, &c.

[Sidenote: Phosphorescent bacteria.]

The bodies of sea fish, _e.g._ mackerel and other animals, have long been
known to exhibit phosphorescence. This phenomenon is due to the activity of
a whole series of marine bacteria of various genera, the examination and
cultivation of which have been successfully carried out by Cohn, Beyerinck,
Fischer and others. The cause of the phosphorescence is still a mystery.
The suggestion that it is due to the oxidation of a body excreted by the
bacteria seems answered by the failure to filter off or extract any such
body. Beyerinck's view that it occurs at the moment peptones are worked up
into the protoplasm cannot be regarded as proved, and the same must be said
of the suggestion that the phosphorescence is due to the oxidation of
phosphoretted hydrogen. The conditions of phosphorescence are, the presence
of free oxygen, and, generally, a relatively low temperature, together with
a medium containing sodium chloride, and peptones, but little or no
carbohydrates. Considerable differences occur in these latter respects,
however, and interesting results were obtained by Beyerinck with mixtures
of species possessing different powers of enzyme action as regards
carbohydrates. Thus, a form termed _Photobacterium phosphorescens_ by
Beyerinck will absorb maltose, and will become luminous if that sugar is
present, whereas _P. Pflugeri_ is indifferent to maltose. If then we
prepare densely inseminated plates of these two bacteria in gelatine
food-medium to which starch is added as the only carbohydrate, the bacteria
grow but do not phosphoresce. If we now streak these plates with an
organism, _e.g._ a yeast, which saccharifies starch, it is possible to tell
whether maltose or levulose and fructose are formed; if the former, only
those plates containing _P. phosphorescens_ will become luminous; if the
latter, only those containing _P. Pflugeri_. The more recent researches of
Molisch have shown that the luminosity of ordinary butcher's meat under
appropriate conditions is quite a common occurrence. Thus of samples of
meat bought in Prague and kept in a cool room for about two days,
luminosity was present in 52% of the samples in the case of beef, 50% for
veal, and 39% for liver. If the meat was treated previously with a 3% salt
solution, 89% of the samples of beef and 65% of the samples of horseflesh
were found to exhibit this phenomenon. The cause of this luminosity is
_Micrococcus phosphorens_, an immotile round, or almost round organism.
This organism is quite distinct from that causing the luminosity of marine
fish.

[Sidenote: Oxidizing bacteria.]

It has long been known that the production of vinegar depends on the
oxidization of the alcohol in wine or beer to acetic acid, the chemical
process being probably carried out in two stages, viz. the oxidation of the
alcohol leading to the formation of aldehyde and water, and the further
oxidation of the aldehyde to acetic acid. The process may even go farther,
and the acetic acid be oxidized to CO_2 and OH_2; the art of the
vinegar-maker is directed to preventing the accomplishment of the last
stage. These oxidations are brought about by the vital activity of several
bacteria, of which four--_Bacterium aceti_, _B. pasteurianum_, _B.
kutzingianum_, and _B. xylinum_--have been thoroughly studied by Hansen and
A. Brown. It is these bacteria which form the zoogloea of the "mother of
vinegar," though this film may contain other organisms as well. The idea
that this film of bacteria oxidizes the alcohol beneath by merely
condensing atmospheric oxygen in its interstices, after the manner of
spongy platinum, has long been given up; but the explanation of the action
as an incomplete combustion, depending on the peculiar respiration of these
organisms--much as in the case of nitrifying and sulphur bacteria--is not
clear, though the discovery that the acetic bacteria will not only oxidize
alcohol to acetic acid, but further oxidize the latter to CO_2 and OH_2
supports the view that the alcohol is absorbed by the organism and employed
as its respirable substance. Promise of more light on these oxidation
fermentations is afforded by the recent discovery that not only bacteria
and fungi, but even the living cells of higher plants, contain peculiar
enzymes which possess the remarkable property of "carrying" oxygen--much as
it is carried in the sulphuric acid chamber--and which have therefore been
termed oxydases. It is apparently the presence of these oxydases which
causes certain wines to change colour and alter in taste when poured from
bottle to glass, and so exposed to air.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Ginger-beer plant, showing yeast (_Saccharomyces
pyriformis_) entangled in the meshes of the bacterium (_B. vermiforme_).
(H. M. W.)]

[Sidenote: Bacteria and light.]

Much as the decade from 1880 to 1890 abounded with investigations on the
reactions of bacteria to heat, so the following decade was remarkable for
discoveries regarding the effects of other forms of radiant energy. The
observations of Downes and Blunt in 1877 left it uncertain whether the
bactericidal effects in broth cultures exposed to solar rays were due to
thermal action or not. Further investigations, in which Arloing, Buchner,
Chmelewski, and others took part, have led to the proof that rays of light
alone are quite capable of killing these organisms. The principal questions
were satisfactorily settled by Marshall Ward's experiments in 1892-1893,
when he showed that even the spores of _B. anthracis_, which withstand
temperatures of 100° C. and upwards, can be killed by exposure to rays of
reflected light at temperatures far below anything injurious, or even
favourable to growth. He also showed that the bactericidal action takes
place in the absence of food materials, thus proving that it is not merely
a poisoning effect of the altered medium. The principal experiments also
indicate that it is the rays of highest refrangibility--the blue-violet and
ultra-violet rays of the spectrum--which bring about the destruction of the
organisms (figs. 17, 18). The practical effect of the bactericidal action
of solar light is the destruction of enormous quantities of germs in
rivers, the atmosphere and other exposed situations, and experiments have
shown that it is especially the pathogenic bacteria--anthrax, typhoid,
&c.--which thus succumb to light-action; the discovery that the electric
arc is very rich in bactericidal rays led to the hope that it could be used
for disinfecting purposes in hospitals, but mechanical difficulties
intervene. The recent application of the action of bactericidal rays to the
cure of lupus is, however, an extension of the same discovery. Even when
the light is not sufficiently intense, or the exposure is too short to kill
the spores, the experiments show that attenuation of virulence [v.03
p.0169] may result, a point of extreme importance in connexion with the
lighting and ventilation of dwellings, the purification of rivers and
streams, and the general diminution of epidemics in nature.

[Sidenote: Bacteria and cold.]

As we have seen, thermophilous bacteria can grow at high temperatures, and
it has long been known that some forms develop on ice. The somewhat
different question of the resistance of ripe spores or cells to extremes of
heat and cold has received attention. Ravenel, Macfadyen and Rowland have
shown that several bacilli will bear exposure for seven days to the
temperature of liquid air (-192° C. to -183° C.) and again grow when put
into normal conditions. More recent experiments have shown that even ten
hours' exposure to the temperature of liquid hydrogen -252° C. (21° on the
absolute scale) failed to kill them. It is probable that all these cases of
resistance of seeds, spores, &c., are to be connected with the fact that
completely dry albumin does not lose its coagulability on heating to 110°
C. for some hours, since it is well known that completely ripe spores and
dry heat are the conditions of extreme experiments.

[Sidenote: Pathogenic bacteria.]

No sharp line can be drawn between pathogenic and non-pathogenic
Schizomycetes, and some of the most marked steps in the progress of our
modern knowledge of these organisms depend on the discovery that their
pathogenicity or virulence can be modified--diminished or increased--by
definite treatment, and, in the natural course of epidemics, by alterations
in the environment. Similarly we are unable to divide Schizomycetes sharply
into parasites and saprophytes, since it is well proved that a number of
species--facultative parasites--can become one or the other according to
circumstances. These facts, and the further knowledge that many bacteria
never observed as parasites, or as pathogenic forms, produce toxins or
poisons as the result of their decompositions and fermentations of organic
substances, have led to important results in the applications of
bacteriology to medicine.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--The ginger-beer plant.

A. One of the brain-like gelatinous masses into which the mature "plant"
condenses.

B. The bacterium with and without its gelatinous sheaths (cf. fig. 19).

C. Typical filaments and rodlets in the slimy sheaths.

D. Stages of growth of a sheathed filament--a at 9 A.M., b at 3 P.M., c at
9 P.M., d at 11 A.M. next day, e at 3 P.M., f at 9 P.M., g at 10.30 A.M.
next day, h at 24 hours later. (H. M. W.)]

[Sidenote: Bacteriosis in plants.]

Bacterial diseases in the higher plants have been described, but the
subject requires careful treatment, since several points suggest doubts as
to the organism described being the cause of the disease referred to their
agency. Until recently it was urged that the acid contents of plants
explained their immunity from bacterial diseases, but it is now known that
many bacteria can flourish in acid media. Another objection was that even
if bacteria obtained access through the stomata, they could not penetrate
the cell-walls bounding the intercellular spaces, but certain anaerobic
forms are known to ferment cellulose, and others possess the power of
penetrating the cell-walls of living cells, as the bacteria of Leguminosae
first described by Marshall Ward in 1887, and confirmed by Miss Dawson in
1898. On the other hand a long list of plant-diseases has been of late
years attributed to bacterial action. Some, _e.g._ the Sereh disease of the
sugar-cane, the slime fluxes of oaks and other trees, are not only very
doubtful cases, in which other organisms such as yeasts and fungi play
their parts, but it may be regarded as extremely improbable that the
bacteria are the primary agents at all; they are doubtless saprophytic
forms which have gained access to rotting tissues injured by other agents.
Saprophytic bacteria can readily make their way down the dead hypha of an
invading fungus, or into the punctures made by insects, and Aphides have
been credited with the bacterial infection of carnations, though more
recent researches by Woods go to show the correctness of his conclusion
that Aphides alone are responsible for the carnation disease. On the other
hand, recent investigation has brought to light cases in which bacteria are
certainly the primary agents in diseases of plants. The principal features
are the stoppage of the vessels and consequent wilting of the shoots; as a
rule the cut vessels on transverse sections of the shoots appear brown and
choked with a dark yellowish slime in which bacteria may be detected,
_e.g._ cabbages, cucumbers, potatoes, &c. In the carnation disease and in
certain diseases of tobacco and other plants the seat of bacterial action
appears to be the parenchyma, and it may be that Aphides or other piercing
insects infect the plants, much as insects convey pollen from plant to
plant, or (though in a different way) as mosquitoes infect man with
malaria. If the recent work on the cabbage disease may be accepted, the
bacteria make their entry at the water pores at the margins of the leaf,
and thence via the glandular cells to the tracheids. Little is known of the
mode of action of bacteria on these plants, but it may be assumed with
great confidence that they excrete enzymes and poisons (toxins), which
diffuse into the cells and kill them, and that the effects are in principle
the same as those of parasitic fungi. Support is found for this opinion in
Beyerinck's discovery that the juices of tobacco plants affected with the
disease known as "leaf mosaic," will induce this disease after filtration
through porcelain.

[Sidenote: Symbiosis.]

In addition to such cases as the kephir and ginger-beer plants (figs. 19,
20), where anaerobic bacteria are associated with yeasts, several
interesting examples of symbiosis among bacteria are now known. _Bacillus
chauvaei_ ferments cane-sugar solutions in such a way that normal butyric
arid, inactive lactic acid, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen result;
_Micrococcus acidi-paralactici_, on the other hand, ferments such solutions
to optically active paralactic acid. Nencki showed, however, that if both
these organisms occur together, the resulting products contain large
quantities of normal butyl alcohol, a substance neither bacterium can
produce alone. Other observers have brought forward other cases. Thus
neither _B. coli_ nor the _B. denitrificans_ of Burri and Stutzer can
reduce nitrates, but if acting together they so completely undo the
structure of sodium nitrate that the nitrogen passes off in the free state.
Van Senus showed that the concurrence of two bacteria is necessary before
his _B. amylobacter_ can ferment cellulose, and the case of mud bacteria
which evolve sulphuretted hydrogen below which is utilized by sulphur
bacteria above has already been quoted, as also that of Winogradsky's
_Clostridium [v.03 p.0170] pasteurianum_, which is anaerobic, and can fix
nitrogen only if protected from oxygen by aerobic species. It is very
probable that numerous symbiotic fermentations in the soil are due to this
co-operation of oxygen-protecting species with anaerobic ones, _e.g._
_Tetanus_.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--A plate-culture colony of a species of
_Bacillus--Proteus_ (Hauser)--on the fifth day. The flame-like processes
and outliers are composed of writhing filaments, and the contours are
continually changing while the colony moves as a whole. Slightly magnified.
(H. M. W.)]

[Sidenote: Activity of bacteria.]

Astonishment has been frequently expressed at the powerful activities of
bacteria--their rapid growth and dissemination, the extensive and profound
decompositions and fermentations induced by them, the resistance of their
spores to dessication, heat, &c.--but it is worth while to ask how far
these properties are really remarkable when all the data for comparison
with other organisms are considered. In the first place, the extremely
small size and isolation of the vegetative cells place the protoplasmic
contents in peculiarly favourable circumstances for action, and we may
safely conclude that, weight for weight and molecule for molecule, the
protoplasm of bacteria is brought into contact with the environment at far
more points and over a far larger surface than is that of higher organisms,
whether--as in plants--it is distributed in thin layers round the
sap-vacuoles, or--as in animals--is bathed in fluids brought by special
mechanisms to irrigate it. Not only so, the isolation of the cells
facilitates the exchange of liquids and gases, the passage in of food
materials and out of enzymes and products of metabolism, and thus each unit
of protoplasm obtains opportunities of immediate action, the results of
which are removed with equal rapidity, not attainable in more complex
multi-cellular organisms. To put the matter in another way, if we could
imagine all the living cells of a large oak or of a horse, having given up
the specializations of function impressed on them during evolution and
simply carrying out the fundamental functions of nutrition, growth, and
multiplication which mark the generalized activities of the bacterial cell,
and at the same time rendered as accessible to the environment by isolation
and consequent extension of surface, we should doubtless find them exerting
changes in the fermentable fluids necessary to their life similar to those
exerted by an equal mass of bacteria, and that in proportion to their
approximation in size to the latter. Ciliary movements, which undoubtedly
contribute in bringing the surface into contact with larger supplies of
oxygen and other fluids in unity of time, are not so rapid or so extensive
when compared with other standards than the apparent dimensions of the
microscopic field. The microscope magnifies the distance traversed as well
as the organism, and although a bacterium which covers 9-10 cm. or more in
15 minutes--say 0.1 mm. or 100 µ per second--appears to be darting across
the field with great velocity, because its own small size--say 5 × 1
µ--comes into comparison, it should be borne in mind that if a mouse 2 in.
long only, travelled twenty times its own length, _i.e._ 40 in., in a
second, the distance traversed in 15 minutes at that rate, viz. 1000 yards,
would not appear excessive. In a similar way we must be careful, in our
wonder at the marvellous rapidity of cell-division and growth of bacteria,
that we do not exaggerate the significance of the phenomenon. It takes any
ordinary rodlet 30-40 minutes to double its length and divide into two
equal daughter cells when growth is at its best; nearer the minimum it may
require 3-4 hours or even much longer. It is by no means certain that even
the higher rate is greater than that exhibited by a tropical bamboo which
will grow over a foot a day, or even common grasses, or asparagus, during
the active period of cell-division, though the phenomenon is here
complicated by the phase of extension due to intercalation of water. The
enormous extension of surface also facilitates the absorption of energy
from the environment, and, to take one case only, it is impossible to doubt
that some source of radiant energy must be at the disposal of those
prototrophic forms which decompose carbonates and assimilate carbonic acid
in the dark and oxidize nitrogen in dry rocky regions where no organic
materials are at their disposal, even could they utilize them. It is
usually stated that the carbon dioxide molecule is here split by means of
energy derived from the oxidation of nitrogen, but apart from the fact that
none of these processes can proceed until the temperature rises to the
minimum cardinal point, Engelmann's experiment shows that in the purple
bacteria rays are used other than those employed by green plants, and
especially ultra-red rays not seen in the spectrum, and we may probably
conclude that "dark rays"--_i.e._ rays not appearing in the visible
spectrum--are absorbed and employed by these and other colourless bacteria.
The purple bacteria have thus two sources of energy, one by the oxidation
of sulphur and another by the absorption of "dark rays." Stoney (_Scient.
Proc. R. Dub. Soc._, 1893, p. 154) has suggested yet another source of
energy, in the bombardment of these minute masses by the molecules of the
environment, the velocity of which is sufficient to drive them well into
the organism, and carry energy in of which they can avail themselves.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.--Portions of a colony such as that in fig. 21,
highly magnified, showing the kinds of changes brought about in a few
minutes, from A to B, and B to C, by the growth and ciliary movements of
the filaments. The arrows show the direction of motion. (H. M. W.)]

AUTHORITIES.--General: Fischer, _The Structure and Functions of Bacteria_
(Oxford, 1900, 2nd ed.), German (Jena, 1903); Migula, _System der
Bakterien_ (Jena, 1897); and in Engler and Prantl, _Die natürlichen
Pflanzenfamilien_, I. Th. 1 Abt. a; Lafar, _Technical Mycology_ (vol. i.
London, 1898); Mace, _Traité pratique de bakteriologie_ (5th ed. 1904).
Fossil bacteria: Renault, "Recherches sur les Bactériacées fossiles," _Ann.
des Sc. Nat._, 1896, p. 275. Bacteria in Water: Frankland and Marshall
Ward. "Reports on the Bacteriology of Water," _Proc. R. Soc._, vol. li. p.
183, vol. liii. p. 245, vol. lvi. p. 1; Marshall Ward, "On the Biology of
_B. ramosus_," _Proc. R. Soc._, vol. lviii. p. 1; and papers on Bacteria of
the river Thames in _Ann. of Bot._ vol. xii. pp. 59 and 287, and vol. xiii.
p. 197. Cell-membrane, &c.: Butschli, _Weitere Ausfuhrungen über den Bau
der Cyanophyceen und Bakterien_ (Leipzig, 1896); Fischer, _Unters. über den
Bau der Cyanophyceen und Bakterien_ (Jena, 1897); Rowland, "Observations
upon the Structure of Bacteria," _Trans. Jenner Institute_, 2nd ser. 1899,
p. 143, with literature. Cilia: Fischer, "Unters. über Bakterien,"
_Pringsh. Jahrb._ vol. xxvii.; also the works of Migula and Fischer already
cited. Nucleus: Wager in _Ann. Bot._ vol. ix. p. 659; also Migula and
Fischer, _l.c._; Vejdovsky, "Über den Kern der Bakterien und seine
Teilung," _Cent. f. Bakt._ Abt. II. Bd. xi. (1904) p. 481; _ibid._
"Cytologisches über die Bakterien der Prager Wasserleitung," _Cent. f.
Bakt._ Abt. II. Bd. xv. (1905); Mencl, "Nachträge zu den
Strukturverhältnissen von Bakterium gammari" in _Archiv f. Protistenkunde_,
Bd. viii. (1907), p. 257. Spores, &c.: Marshall Ward, "On the Biology of
_B. ramosus_," _Proc. R. Soc._, 1895, vol. lviii. p. 1; Sturgis, "A Soil
Bacillus of the type of de Bary's _B. megatherium_," _Phil. Trans._ [v.03
p.0171] vol. cxci. p. 147; Klein, L., _Ber. d. deutschen bot. Gesellsch._
(1889), Bd. vii.; and _Cent. f. Bakt. und Par._ (1889), Bd. vi.
Classification: Marshall Ward, "On the Characters or Marks employed for
classifying the Schizomycetes," _Ann. of Bot._, 1892, vol. vi.; Lehmann and
Neumann, _Atlas and Essentials of Bacteriology_; also the works of Migula
and Fischer already cited. Myxobacteriaceae: Berkeley, _Introd. to
Cryptogamic Botany_ (1857), p. 313; Thaxter, "A New Order of
Schizomycetes," _Bot. Gaz._ vol. xvii. (1892), p. 389; and "Further
Observations on the Myxobacteriaceae," _ibid._ vol. xxiii. (1897), p. 395,
and "Notes on the Myxobacteriaceae," _ibid._ vol. xxxvii. (1904), p. 405;
Baur, "Myxobakterienstudien," _Arch. f. Protistenkunde_, Bd. v. (1904), p.
92; Smith, "Myxobacteria," _Jour. of Botany_, 1901, p. 69; Quehl, _Cent. f.
Bakt._ xvi. (1896), p. 9. Growth: Marshall Ward, "On the Biology of _B.
ramosus_," _Proc. R. Soc._ vol. lviii. p. 1 (1895). Fermentation, &c.:
Warington, _The Chemical Action of some Micro-organisms_ (London, 1888);
Winogradsky, "Recherches sur les organismes de la nitrification," _Ann. de
l'Inst. Past._, 1890, pp. 213, 257, 760, 1891, pp. 92 and 577; "Sur
l'assimilation de l'azote gazeux, &c.," _Compt. Rend._, 12 Feb. 1894; "Zur
Microbiologie des Nitrifikationsprozesses," _Cent. f. Bakt._ Abt. II. Bd.
ii. (1896), p. 415; "Ueber Schwefel-Bakterien," _Bot. Zeitg._, 1887, Nos.
31-37; _Beitr. zur Morph. u. Phys. der Bakterien_, H. 1 (1888); "Ueber
Eisenbakterien," _Bot. Zeitg._, 1888, p. 261; and Omeliansky, "Ueber den
Einfluss der organischen Substanzen auf die Arbeit der nitrifizierenden
Organismen," _Cent. f. Bakt._ Abt. II. Bd. v. (1896); Schorler, "Beitr. zur
Kenntniss der Eisenbakterien," _Cent. f. Bakt._ Abt. II. Bd. xii. (1904),
p. 681; Marshall Ward, "On the Tubercular Swellings on the Roots of Vicia
Faba," _Phil. Trans._, 1877, p. 539; Hellriegel and Wilfarth, "Unters. über
die Stickstoffnahrung der Gramineen u. Leguminosen," _Beit. Zeit. d.
Vereins für die Rübenzuckerindustrie_ (Berlin, 1888); Nobbe and Hiltner,
_Landw. Versuchsstationen_ (1899), Bd. 51, p. 241, and Bd. 52, p. 455;
Mazé, _Annales de l'Institut Pasteur_, t. II, p. 44, and t. 12, p. 1
(1897); Prazmowski, _Land. Versuchsstationen_, Bd. 37 (1890), p. 161, Bd.
38 (1891), p. 5; Frank, _Landw. Jahrb._ Bd. 17 (1888), p. 441; Omelianski,
"Sur la fermentation de la cellulose," _Compt. Rend._, 4 Nov. 1895; van
Senus, _Beitr. zur Kenntn. der Cellulosegährung_ (Leiden, 1890); van
Tieghem, "Sur la fermentation de la cellulose," _Bull. de la soc. bot. de
Fr._ t. xxvi. (1879), p. 28; Beyerinck "Ueber Spirillum desulphuricans,
&c.," _Cent. f. Bakt._ Abt. II. Bd. i. (1895), p. 1; Molisch, _Die Pflanze
in ihren Beziehungen zum Eisen_ (Jena, 1892). Pigment Bacteria: Ewart, "On
the Evolution of Oxygen from Coloured Bacteria," _Linn. Journ._, 1897, vol.
xxxiii. p. 123; Molisch, _Die Purpurbakterien_ (Jena, 1907). Oxydases and
Enzymes: Green, _The Soluble Ferments and Fermentation_ (Cambridge, 1899).
Action of Light, &c.: Marshall Ward, "The Action of Light on Bacteria,"
_Phil. Trans._, 1893, p. 961, and literature. Resistance to Cold, &c.:
Ravenel, _Med. News_, 1899, vol. lxxiv.; Macfadyen and Rowland, _Proc. R.
Soc._ vol. lxvi. pp. 180, 339, and 488; Farmer, "Observations on the Effect
of Desiccation of Albumin upon its Coagulability," _ibid._ p. 329.
Pathogenic Bacteria: Baumgarten, _Pathologische Mykologie_ (1890); Kolle
and Wassermann, _Handbuch der pathogenen Mikroorganismen_ (1902-1904); and
numerous special works in medical literature. Immunity: Ehrlich, "On
Immunity with Special Reference to Cell-life," _Proc. R. Soc._ vol. lxvi.
p. 424; Calcar, "Die Fortschritte der Immunitäts- und Spezifizetätslehre
seit 1870," _Progressus Rei Botanicae_, Bd. I. Heft 3 (1907). Bacteriosis:
Migula, _l.c._ p. 322, has collected the literature; see also Sorauer,
_Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten_, I. (1905), pp. 18-93, for later
literature. Symbiosis: Marshall Ward, "Symbiosis," _Ann. of Bot._ vol.
xiii. p. 549, and literature.

(H. M. W.; V. H. B.)

II. PATHOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE

The action of bacteria as pathogenic agents is in great part merely an
instance of their general action as producers of chemical change, yet
bacteriology as a whole has become so extensive, and has so important a
bearing on subjects widely different from one another, that division of it
has become essential. The science will accordingly be treated in this
section from the pathological standpoint only. It will be considered under
the three following heads, viz. (1) the methods employed in the study; (2)
the modes of action of bacteria and the effects produced by them; and (3)
the facts and theories with regard to immunity against bacterial disease.

[Sidenote: Historical summary.]

The demonstration by Pasteur that definite diseases could be produced by
bacteria, proved a great stimulus to research in the etiology of infective
conditions, and the result was a rapid advance in human knowledge. An
all-important factor in this remarkable progress was the introduction by
Koch of solid culture media, of the "plate-method," &c., an account of
which he published in 1881. By means of these the modes of cultivation, and
especially of separation, of bacteria were greatly simplified. Various
modifications have since been made, but the routine methods in
bacteriological procedure still employed are in great part those given by
Koch. By 1876 the anthrax bacillus had been obtained in pure culture by
Koch, and some other pathogenic bacteria had been observed in the tissues,
but it was in the decade 1880-1890 that the most important discoveries were
made in this field. Thus the organisms of suppuration, tubercle, glanders,
diphtheria, typhoid fever, cholera, tetanus, and others were identified,
and their relationship to the individual diseases established. In the last
decade of the 19th century the chief discoveries were of the bacillus of
influenza (1892), of the bacillus of plague (1894) and of the bacillus of
dysentery (1898). Immunity against diseases caused by bacteria has been the
subject of systematic research from 1880 onwards. In producing active
immunity by the attenuated virus, Duguid and J. S. Burdon-Sanderson and
W. S. Greenfield in Great Britain, and Pasteur, Toussaint and Chauveau in
France, were pioneers. The work of Metchnikoff, dating from about 1884, has
proved of high importance, his theory of phagocytosis (_vide infra_) having
given a great stimulus to research, and having also contributed to
important advances. The modes by which bacteria produce their effects also
became a subject of study, and attention was naturally turned to their
toxic products. The earlier work, notably that of L. Brieger, chiefly
concerned ptomaines (_vide infra_), but no great advance resulted. A new
field of inquiry was, however, opened up when, by filtration a
bacterium-free toxic fluid was obtained which produced the important
symptoms of the disease--in the case of diphtheria by P. P. E. Roux and A.
Yersin (1888), and in the case of tetanus a little later by various
observers. Research was thus directed towards ascertaining the nature of
the toxic bodies in such a fluid, and Brieger and Fraenkel (1890) found
that they were proteids, to which they gave the name "toxalbumins." Though
subsequent researches have on the whole confirmed these results, it is
still a matter of dispute whether these proteids are the true toxins or
merely contain the toxic bodies precipitated along with them. In the United
Kingdom the work of Sidney Martin, in the separation of toxic substances
from the bodies of those who have died from certain diseases, is also
worthy of mention. Immunity against toxins also became a subject of
investigation, and the result was the discovery of the antitoxic action of
the serum of animals immunized against tetanus toxin by E. Behring and
Kitazato (1890), and by Tizzoni and Cattani. A similar result was also
obtained in the case of diphtheria. The facts with regard to passive
immunity were thus established and were put to practical application by the
introduction of diphtheria antitoxin as a therapeutic agent in 1894. The
technique of serum preparation has become since that time greatly
elaborated and improved, the work of P. Ehrlich in this respect being
specially noteworthy. The laws of passive immunity were shown to hold also
in the case of immunity against living organisms by R. Pfeiffer (1894), and
various anti-bacterial sera have been introduced. Of these the
anti-streptococcic serum of A. Marmorek (1895) is one of the best known.
The principles of protective inoculation have been developed and
practically applied on a large scale, notably by W. M. W. Haffkine in the
case of cholera (1893) and plague (1896), and more recently by Wright and
Semple in the case of typhoid fever. One other discovery of great
importance may be mentioned, viz. the agglutinative action of the serum of
a patient suffering from a bacterial disease, first described in the case
of typhoid fever independently by Widal and by Grünbaum in 1896, though led
up to by the work of Pfeiffer, Gruber and Durham and others. Thus a new aid
was added to medical science, viz. serum diagnosis of disease. The last
decade of the 19th century will stand out in the history of medical science
as the period in which serum therapeutics and serum diagnosis had their
birth.

In recent years the relations of toxin and antitoxin, still obscure, have
been the subject of much study and controversy. It was formerly supposed
that the injection of attenuated cultures or dead organisms--vaccines in
the widest sense--was only of service in producing immunity as a preventive
measure against the corresponding organism, but the work of [v.03 p.0172]
Sir Almroth Wright has shown that the use of such vaccines may be of
service even after infection has occurred, especially when the resulting
disease is localized. In this case a general reaction is stimulated by the
vaccine which may aid in the destruction of the invading organisms. In
regulating the administration of such vaccines he has introduced the method
of observing the _opsonic index_, to which reference is made below. Of the
discoveries of new organisms the most important is that of the _Spirochaete
pallida_ in syphilis by Schaudinn and Hoffmann in 1905; and although proof
that it is the cause of the disease is not absolute, the facts that have
been established constitute very strong presumptive evidence in favour of
this being the case. It may be noted, however, that it is still doubtful
whether this organism is to be placed amongst the bacteria or amongst the
protozoa.

[Sidenote: Methods of study.]

The methods employed in studying the relation of bacteria to disease are in
principle comparatively simple, but considerable experience and great care
are necessary in applying them and in interpreting results. In any given
disease there are three chief steps, viz. (1) the discovery of a bacterium
in the affected tissues by means of the microscope; (2) the obtaining of
the bacterium in pure culture; and (3) the production of the disease by
inoculation with a pure culture. By means of microscopic examination more
than one organism may sometimes be observed in the tissues, but one single
organism by its constant presence and special relations to the tissue
changes can usually be selected as the probable cause of the disease, and
attempts towards its cultivation can then be made. Such microscopic
examination requires the use of the finest lenses and the application of
various _staining_ methods. In these latter the basic aniline dyes in
solution are almost exclusively used, on account of their special affinity
for the bacterial protoplasm. The methods vary much in detail, though in
each case the endeavour is to colour the bacteria as deeply, and the
tissues as faintly, as possible. Sometimes a simple watery solution of the
dye is sufficient, but very often the best result is obtained by increasing
the staining power, _e.g._ by addition of weak alkali, application of heat,
&c., and by using some substance which acts as a mordant and tends to fix
the stain to the bacteria. Excess of stain is afterwards removed from the
tissues by the use of decolorizing agents, such as acids of varying
strength and concentration, alcohol, &c. Different bacteria behave very
differently to stains; some take them up rapidly, others slowly, some
resist decolorization, others are easily decolorized. In some instances the
stain can be entirely removed from the tissues, leaving the bacteria alone
coloured, and the tissues can then be stained by another colour. This is
the case in the methods for staining the tubercle bacillus and also in
Gram's method, the essential point in which latter is the treatment with a
solution of iodine before decolorizing. In Gram's method, however, only
some bacteria retain the stain, while others lose it. The tissues and
fluids are treated by various histological methods, but, to speak
generally, examination is made either in films smeared on thin
cover-glasses and allowed to dry, or in thin sections cut by the microtome
after suitable fixation and hardening of the tissue. In the case of any
bacterium discovered, observation must be made in a long series of
instances in order to determine its invariable presence.

[Sidenote: Cultivation.]

In cultivating bacteria outside the body various media to serve as food
material must be prepared and sterilized by heat. The general principle in
their preparation is to supply the nutriment for bacterial growth in a form
as nearly similar as possible to that of the natural habitat of the
organisms--in the case of pathogenic bacteria, the natural fluids of the
body. The media are used either in a fluid or solid condition, the latter
being obtained by a process of coagulation, or by the addition of a
gelatinizing agent, and are placed in glass tubes or flasks plugged with
cotton-wool. To mention examples, blood serum solidified at a suitable
temperature is a highly suitable medium, and various media are made with
extract of meat as a basis, with the addition of gelatine or agar as
solidifying agents and of non-coagulable proteids (commercial "peptone") to
make up for proteids lost by coagulation in the preparation. The reaction
of the media must in every case be carefully attended to, a neutral or
slightly alkaline reaction being, as a rule, most suitable; for delicate
work it may be necessary to standardize the reaction by titration methods.
The media from the store-flasks are placed in glass test-tubes or small
flasks, protected from contamination by cotton-wool plugs, and are
sterilized by heat. For most purposes the solid media are to be preferred,
since bacterial growth appears as a discrete mass and accidental
contamination can be readily recognized. Cultures are made by transferring
by means of a sterile platinum wire a little of the material containing the
bacteria to the medium. The tubes, after being thus inoculated, are kept at
suitable temperatures, usually either at 37° C., the temperature of the
body, or at about 20° C., a warm summer temperature, until growth appears.
For maintaining a constant temperature incubators with regulating apparatus
are used. Subsequent cultures or, as they are called, "subcultures," may be
made by inoculating fresh tubes, and in this way growth may be maintained
often for an indefinite period. The simplest case is that in which only one
variety of bacterium is present, and a "pure culture" may then be obtained
at once. When, however, several species are present together, means must be
adopted for separating them. For this purpose various methods have been
devised, the most important being the _plate-method_ of Koch. In this
method the bacteria are distributed in a gelatine or agar medium liquefied
by heat, and the medium is then poured out on sterile glass plates or in
shallow glass dishes, and allowed to solidify. Each bacterium capable of
growth gives rise to a colony visible to the naked eye, and if the colonies
are sufficiently apart, an inoculation can be made from any one to a tube
of culture-medium and a pure culture obtained. Of course, in applying the
method means must be adopted for suitably diluting the bacterial mixture.
Another important method consists in inoculating an animal with some fluid
containing the various bacteria. A pathogenic bacterium present may invade
the body, and may be obtained in pure culture from the internal organs.
This method applies especially to pathogenic bacteria whose growth on
culture media is slow, _e.g._ the tubercle bacillus.

The full description of a particular bacterium implies an account not only
of its microscopical characters, but also of its growth characters in
various culture media, its biological properties, and the effects produced
in animals by inoculation. To demonstrate readily its action on various
substances, certain media have been devised. For example, various
sugars--lactose, glucose, saccharose, &c.--are added to test the
fermentative action of the bacterium on these substances; litmus is added
to show changes in reaction, specially standardized media being used for
estimating such changes; peptone solution is commonly employed for testing
whether or not the bacterium forms indol; sterilized milk is used as a
culture medium to determine whether or not it is curdled by the growth.
Sometimes a bacterium can be readily recognized from one or two characters,
but not infrequently a whole series of tests must be made before the
species is determined. As our knowledge has advanced it has become
abundantly evident that the so-called pathogenic bacteria are not organisms
with special features, but that each is a member of a group of organisms
possessing closely allied characters. From the point of view of evolution
we may suppose that certain races of a group of bacteria have gradually
acquired the power of invading the tissues of the body and producing
disease. In the acquisition of pathogenic properties some of their original
characters have become changed, but in many instances this has taken place
only to a slight degree, and, furthermore, some of these changes are not of
a permanent character. It is to be noted that in the case of bacteria we
can only judge of organisms being of different species by the stability of
the characters which distinguish them, and numerous examples might be given
where their characters become modified by comparatively slight change in
their environment. The cultural as well as the microscopical [v.03 p.0173]
characters of a pathogenic organism may be closely similar to other
non-pathogenic members of the same group, and it thus comes to be a matter
of extreme difficulty in certain cases to state what criterion should be
used in differentiating varieties. The tests which are applied for this
purpose at present are chiefly of two kinds. In the first place, such
organisms may be differentiated by the chemical change produced by them in
various culture media, _e.g._ by their fermentative action on various
sugars, &c., though in this case such properties may become modified in the
course of time. And in the second place, the various serum reactions to be
described below have been called into requisition. It may be stated that
the introduction of a particular bacterium into the tissues of the body
leads to certain properties appearing in the serum, which are chiefly
exerted towards this particular bacterium. Such a serum may accordingly
within certain limits be used for differentiating this organism from others
closely allied to it (_vide infra_).

The modes of cultivation described apply only to organisms which grow in
presence of oxygen. Some, however--the strictly _anaerobic_ bacteria--grow
only in the absence of oxygen; hence means must be adopted for excluding
this gas. It is found that if the inoculation be made deep down in a solid
medium, growth of an anaerobic organism will take place, especially if the
medium contains some reducing agent such as glucose. Such cultures are
called "deep cultures." To obtain growth of an anaerobic organism on the
surface of a medium, in using the plate method, and also for cultures in
fluids, the air is displaced by an indifferent gas, usually hydrogen.

[Sidenote: Inoculation.]

In testing the effects of bacteria by inoculation the smaller rodents,
rabbits, guinea-pigs, and mice, are usually employed. One great drawback in
certain cases is that such animals are not susceptible to a given
bacterium, or that the disease is different in character from that in the
human subject. In some cases, _e.g._ Malta fever and relapsing fever,
monkeys have been used with success, but in others, _e.g._ leprosy, none of
the lower animals has been found to be susceptible. Discretion must
therefore be exercised in interpreting negative results in the lower
animals. For purposes of inoculation young vigorous cultures must be used.
The bacteria are mixed with some indifferent fluid, or a fluid culture is
employed. The injections are made by means of a hypodermic syringe into the
subcutaneous tissue, into a vein, into one of the serous sacs, or more
rarely into some special part of the body. The animal, after injection,
must be kept in favourable surroundings, and any resulting symptoms noted.
It may die, or may be killed at any time desired, and then a post-mortem
examination is made, the conditions of the organs, &c., being observed and
noted. The various tissues affected are examined microscopically and
cultures made from them; in this way the structural changes and the
relation of bacteria to them can be determined.

[Sidenote: Separation of toxins.]

Though the causal relationship of a bacterium to a disease may be
completely established by the methods given, another very important part of
bacteriology is concerned with the poisons or toxins formed by bacteria.
These toxins may become free in the culture fluid, and the living bacteria
may then be got rid of by filtering the fluid through a filter of unglazed
porcelain, whose pores are sufficiently small to retain them. The passage
of the fluid is readily effected by negative pressure produced by an
ordinary water exhaust-pump. The effects of the filtrate are then tested by
the methods used in pharmacology. In other instances the toxins are
retained to a large extent within the bacteria, and in this case the dead
bacteria are injected as a suspension in fluid. Methods have been
introduced for the purpose of breaking up the bodies of bacteria and
setting free the intracellular toxins. For this purpose Koch ground up
tubercle bacilli in an agate mortar and treated them with distilled water
until practically no deposit remained. Rowland and Macfadyen for the same
purpose introduced the method of grinding the bacilli in liquid air. At
this temperature the bacterial bodies are extremely brittle, and are thus
readily broken up. The study of the nature of toxins requires, of course,
the various methods of organic chemistry. Attempts to obtain them in an
absolutely pure condition have, however, failed in important cases. So that
when a "toxin" is spoken of, a mixture with other organic substances is
usually implied. Or the toxin may be precipitated with other organic
substances, purified to a certain extent by re-solution, re-precipitation,
&c., and desiccated. A "dry toxin" is thus obtained, though still in an
impure condition. Toxic substances have also been separated by
corresponding methods from the bodies of those who have died of certain
diseases, and the action of such substances on animals is in some cases an
important point in the pathology of the disease. Another auxiliary method
has been applied in this department, viz. the separation of organic
substances by filtration under high pressure through a colloid membrane,
gelatine supported in the pores of a porcelain filter being usually
employed. It has been found, for example, that a toxin may pass through
such a filter while an antitoxin may not. The methods of producing immunity
are dealt with below.

[Sidenote: Bacteria as agents of disease.]

The fact that in anthrax, one of the first diseases to be fully studied,
numerous bacilli are present in the blood of infected animals, gave origin
to the idea that the organisms might produce their effect by using up the
oxygen of the blood. Such action is now known to be quite a subsidiary
matter. And although effects may sometimes be produced in a mechanical
manner by bacteria plugging capillaries of important organs, _e.g._ brain
and kidneys, it may now be stated as an accepted fact that all the
important results of bacteria in the tissues are due to poisonous bodies or
toxins formed by them. Here, just as in the general subject of
fermentation, we must inquire whether the bacteria form the substances in
question directly or by means of non-living ferments or enzymes. With
regard to toxin formation the following general statements may be made. In
certain instances, _e.g._ in the case of the tetanus and diphtheria
bacilli, the production of soluble toxins can be readily demonstrated by
filtering a culture in bouillon germ-free by means of a porcelain filter,
and then injecting some of the filtrate into an animal. In this way the
characteristic features of the disease can be reproduced. Such toxins being
set free in the culture medium are often known as _extracellular_. In many
cases, however, the filtrate, when injected, produces comparatively little
effect, whilst toxic action is observed when the bacteria in a dead
condition are used; this is the case with the organisms of tubercle,
cholera, typhoid and many others. The toxins are here manifestly contained
within the bodies of the bacteria, _i.e._ are _intracellular_, though they
may become free on disintegration of the bacteria. The action of these
intracellular toxins has in many instances nothing characteristic, but is
merely in the direction of producing fever and interfering with the vital
processes of the body generally, these disturbances often going on to a
fatal result. In other words, the toxins of different bacteria are closely
similar in their results on the body and the features of the corresponding
diseases are largely regulated by the vital properties of the bacteria,
their distribution in the tissues, &c. The distinction between the two
varieties of toxins, though convenient, must not be pushed too far, as we
know little regarding their mode of formation. Although the formation of
toxins with characteristic action can be shown by the above methods, yet in
some cases little or no toxic action can be demonstrated. This, for
example, is the case with the anthrax bacillus; although the effect of this
organism in the living body indicates the production of toxins which
diffuse for a distance around the bacteria. This and similar facts have
suggested that some toxins are only produced in the living body. A
considerable amount of work has been done in connexion with this subject,
and many observers have found that fluids taken from the living body in
which the organisms have been growing, contain toxic substances, to which
the name of _aggressins_ has been applied. Fluid containing these
aggressins greatly increases the toxic effect of the corresponding
bacteria, and may produce death at an earlier stage than ever occurs with
the bacteria alone. They also appear to have in certain cases a paralysing
action on the cells which act as phagocytes. The [v.03 p.0174] work on this
subject is highly suggestive, and opens up new possibilities with regard to
the investigation of bacterial action within the body. Not only are the
general symptoms of poisoning in bacterial disease due to toxic substances,
but also the tissue changes, many of them of inflammatory nature, in the
neighbourhood of the bacteria. Thus, to mention examples, diphtheria toxin
produces inflammatory oedema which may be followed by necrosis; dead
tubercle bacilli give rise to a tubercle-like nodule, &c. Furthermore, a
bacillus may give rise to more than one toxic body, either as stages in one
process of change or as distinct products. Thus paralysis following
diphtheria is in all probability due to a different toxin from that which
causes the acute symptoms of poisoning or possibly to a modification of it
sometimes formed in specially large amount. It is interesting to note that
in the case of the closely analogous example of snake venoms, there may be
separated from a single venom a number of toxic bodies which have a
selective action on different animal tissues.

[Sidenote: Nature of toxins.]

Regarding the chemical nature of toxins less is known than regarding their
physiological action. Though an enormous amount of work has been done on
the subject, no important bacterial toxin has as yet been obtained in a
pure condition, and, though many of them are probably of proteid nature,
even this cannot be asserted with absolute certainty. Brieger, in his
earlier work, found that alkaloids were formed by bacteria in a variety of
conditions, and that some of them were poisonous. These alkaloids he called
_ptomaines_. The methods used in the investigations were, however, open to
objection, and it is now recognized that although organic bases may
sometimes be formed, and may be toxic, the important toxins are not of that
nature. A later research by Brieger along with Fraenkel pointed to the
extracellular toxins of diphtheria, tetanus and other diseases being of
proteid nature, and various other observers have arrived at a like
conclusion. The general result of such research has been to show that the
toxic bodies are, like proteids, precipitable by alcohol and various salts;
they are soluble in water, are somewhat easily dialysable, and are
relatively unstable both to light and heat. Attempts to get a pure toxin by
repeated precipitation and solution have resulted in the production of a
whitish amorphous powder with highly toxic properties. Such a powder gives
a proteid reaction, and is no doubt largely composed of albumoses, hence
the name _toxalbumoses_ has been applied. The question has, however, been
raised whether the toxin is really itself a proteid, or whether it is not
merely carried down with the precipitate. Brieger and Boer, by
precipitation with certain salts, notably of zinc, obtained a body which
was toxic but gave no reaction of any form of proteid. There is of course
the possibility in this case that the toxin was a proteid, but was in so
small amount that it escaped detection. These facts show the great
difficulty of the problem, which is probably insoluble by present methods
of analysis; the only test, in fact, for the existence of a toxin is its
physiological effect. It may also be mentioned that many toxins have now
been obtained by growing the particular organism in a proteid-free medium,
a fact which shows that if the toxin is a proteid it may be formed
synthetically by the bacterium as well as by modification of proteid
already present. With regard to the nature of intracellular toxins, there
is even greater difficulty in the investigation and still less is known.
Many of them, probably also of proteid nature, are much more resistant to
heat; thus the intracellular toxins of the tubercle bacillus retain certain
of their effects even after exposure to 100° C. Like the extracellular
toxins they may be of remarkable potency; for example, fever is produced in
the human subject by the injection into the blood of an extremely minute
quantity of dead typhoid bacilli.

[Sidenote: Enzymes.]

We cannot as yet speak definitely with regard to the part played by enzymes
in these toxic processes. Certain toxins resemble enzymes as regards their
conditions of precipitation and relative instability, and the fact that in
most cases a considerable period intervenes between the time of injection
and the occurrence of symptoms has been adduced in support of the view that
enzymes are present. In the case of diphtheria Sidney Martin obtained toxic
albumoses in the spleen, which he considered were due to the digestive
action of an enzyme formed by the bacillus in the membrane and absorbed
into the circulation. According to this view, then, a part at least of the
directly toxic substance is produced in the living body by enzymes present
in the so-called toxin obtained from the bacterial culture. Recent
researches go to show that enzymes play a greater part in fermentation by
living ferments than was formerly supposed, and by analogy it is likely
that they are also concerned in the processes of disease. But this has not
been proved, and hitherto no enzyme has been separated from a pathogenic
bacterium capable of forming, by digestive or other action, the toxic
bodies from proteids outside the body. It is also to be noted that, as in
the case of poisons of known constitution, each toxin has a minimum lethal
dose which is proportionate to the weight of the animal and which can be
ascertained with a fair degree of accuracy.

The action of toxins is little understood. It consists in all probability
of disturbance, by means of the chemical affinities of the toxin, of the
highly complicated molecules of living cells. This disturbance results in
disintegration to a varying degree, and may produce changes visible on
microscopic examination. In other cases such changes cannot be detected,
and the only evidence of their occurrence may be the associated symptoms.
The very important work of Ehrlich on diphtheria toxin shows that in the
molecule of toxin there are at least two chief atom groups--one, the
"haptophorous," by which the toxin molecule is attached to the cell
protoplasm; and the other the "toxophorous," which has a ferment-like
action on the living molecule, producing a disturbance which results in the
toxic symptoms. On this theory, susceptibility to a toxin will imply both a
chemical affinity of certain tissues for the toxin molecule and also
sensitiveness to its actions, and, furthermore, non-susceptibility may
result from the absence of either of these two properties.

[Sidenote: Bacterial infection.]

A bacterial infection when analysed is seen to be of the nature of an
intoxication. There is, however, another all-important factor concerned,
viz. the multiplication of the living organisms in the tissues; this is
essential to, and regulates, the supply of toxins. It is important that
these two essential factors should be kept clearly in view, since the means
of defence against any disease may depend upon the power either of
neutralizing toxins or of killing the organisms producing them. It is to be
noted that there is no fixed relation between toxin production and
bacterial multiplication in the body, some of the organisms most active as
toxin producers having comparatively little power of invading the tissues.

[Sidenote: The production of disease.]

We shall now consider how bacteria may behave when they have gained
entrance to the body, what effects may be produced, and what circumstances
may modify the disease in any particular case. The extreme instance of
bacterial invasion is found in some of the septicaemias in the lower
animals, _e.g._ anthrax septicaemia in guinea-pigs, pneumococcus
septicaemia in rabbits. In such diseases the bacteria, when introduced into
the subcutaneous tissue, rapidly gain entrance to the blood stream and
multiply freely in it, and by means of their toxins cause symptoms of
general poisoning. A widespread toxic action is indicated by the lesions
found--cloudy swelling, which may be followed by fatty degeneration, in
internal organs, capillary haemorrhages, &c. In septicaemia in the human
subject, often due to streptococci, the process is similar, but the
organisms are found especially in the capillaries of the internal organs
and may not be detectable in the peripheral circulation during life. In
another class of diseases, the organisms first produce some well-marked
local lesion, from which secondary extension takes place by the lymph or
blood stream to other parts of the body, where corresponding lesions are
formed. In this way secondary abscesses, secondary tubercle glanders and
nodules, &c., result; in typhoid fever there is secondary invasion of the
mesenteric glands, and clumps of bacilli are also found in internal organs,
especially the spleen, though there may be little tissue change around
them. In all such cases there is seen a selective character in the
distribution of the lesions, some organs being in any disease much more
liable to infection than others. In still [v.03 p.0175] another class of
diseases the bacteria are restricted to some particular part of the body,
and the symptoms are due to toxins which are absorbed from it. Thus in
cholera the bacteria are practically confined to the intestine, in
diphtheria to the region of the false membrane, in tetanus to some wound.
In the last-mentioned disease even the local multiplication depends upon
the presence of other bacteria, as the tetanus bacillus has practically no
power of multiplying in the healthy tissues when introduced alone.

[Sidenote: Tissue changes.]

The effects produced by bacteria may be considered under the following
heads: (1) tissue changes produced in the vicinity of the bacteria, either
at the primary or secondary foci; (2) tissue changes produced at a distance
by absorption of their toxins; (3) symptoms. The changes in the vicinity of
bacteria are to be regarded partly as the _direct result_ of the action of
toxins on living cells, and partly as indicating a _reaction_ on the part
of the tissues. (Many such changes are usually grouped together under the
heading of "inflammation" of varying degree--acute, subacute and chronic.)
Degeneration and death of cells, haemorrhages, serous and fibrinous
exudations, leucocyte emigration, proliferation of connective tissue and
other cells, may be mentioned as some of the fundamental changes. Acute
inflammation of various types, suppuration, granulation-tissue formation,
&c., represent some of the complex resulting processes. The changes
produced at a distance by distribution of toxins may be very
manifold--cloudy swelling and fatty degeneration, serous effusions,
capillary haemorrhages, various degenerations of muscle, hyaline
degeneration of small blood-vessels, and, in certain chronic diseases, waxy
degeneration, all of which may be widespread, are examples of the effects
of toxins, rapid or slow in action. Again, in certain cases the toxin has a
special affinity for certain tissues. Thus in diphtheria changes in both
nerve cells and nerve fibres have been found, and in tetanus minute
alterations in the nucleus and protoplasm of nerve cells.

[Sidenote: Symptoms.]

The lesions mentioned are in many instances necessarily accompanied by
functional disturbances or clinical symptoms, varying according to site,
and to the nature and degree of the affection. In addition, however, there
occur in bacterial diseases symptoms to which the correlated structural
changes have not yet been demonstrated. Amongst these the most important is
fever with increased protein metabolism, attended with disturbances of the
circulatory and respiratory Systems. Nervous symptoms, somnolence, coma,
spasms, convulsions and paralysis are of common occurrence. All such
phenomena, however, are likewise due to the disturbance of the molecular
constitution of living cells. Alterations in metabolism are found to be
associated with some of these, but with others no corresponding physical
change can be demonstrated. The action of toxins on various glands,
producing diminished or increased functional activity, has a close analogy
to that of certain drugs. In short, if we place aside the outstanding
exception of tumour growth, we may say that practically all the important
phenomena met with in disease may be experimentally produced by the
injection of bacteria or of their toxins.

[Sidenote: Susceptibility.]

The result of the entrance of a virulent bacterium into the tissues of an
animal is not a disease with hard and fast characters, but varies greatly
with circumstances. With regard to the subject of infection the chief
factor is susceptibility; with regard to the bacterium virulence is
all-important. Susceptibility, as is well recognized, varies much under
natural conditions in different species, in different races of the same
species, and amongst individuals of the same race. It also varies with the
period of life, young subjects being more susceptible to certain diseases,
_e.g._ diphtheria, than adults. Further, there is the very important factor
of acquired susceptibility. It has been experimentally shown that
conditions such as fatigue, starvation, exposure to cold, &c., lower the
general resisting powers and increase the susceptibility to bacterial
infection. So also the local powers of resistance may be lowered by injury
or depressed vitality. In this way conditions formerly believed to be the
causes of disease are now recognized as playing their part in predisposing
to the action of the true causal agent, viz. the bacterium. In health the
blood and internal tissues are bacterium-free; after death they offer a
most suitable pabulum for various bacteria; but between these two extremes
lie states of varying liability to infection. It is also probable that in a
state of health organisms do gain entrance to the blood from time to time
and are rapidly killed off. The circumstances which alter the virulence of
bacteria will be referred to again in connexion with immunity, but it may
be stated here that, as a general rule, the virulence of an organism
towards an animal is increased by sojourn in the tissues of that animal.
The increase of virulence becomes especially marked when the organism is
inoculated from animal to animal in series, the method of _passage_. This
is chiefly to be regarded as an adaptation to surroundings, though the fact
that the less virulent members of the bacterial species will be liable to
be killed off also plays a part. Conversely, the virulence tends to
diminish on cultivation on artificial media outside the body, especially in
circumstances little favourable to growth.

[Sidenote: Immunity.]

By immunity is meant non-susceptibility to a given disease, or to
experimental inoculation with a given bacterium or toxin. The term must be
used in a relative sense, and account must always be taken of the
conditions present. An animal may be readily susceptible to a disease on
experimental inoculation, and yet rarely or never suffer from it naturally,
because the necessary conditions of infection are not supplied in nature.
That an animal possesses natural immunity can only be shown on exposing it
to such conditions, this being usually most satisfactorily done in direct
experiment. Further, there are various degrees of immunity, and in this
connexion conditions of local or general diminished vitality play an
important part in increasing the susceptibility. Animals naturally
susceptible may acquire immunity, on the one hand by successfully passing
through an attack of the disease, or, on the other hand, by various methods
of inoculation. Two chief varieties of artificial immunity are now
generally recognized, differing chiefly according to the mode of
production. In the first--_active immunity_--a reaction or series of
reactions is produced in the body of the animal, usually by injections of
bacteria or their products. The second--_passive immunity_--is produced by
the transference of a quantity of the serum of an animal actively immunized
to a fresh animal; the term is applied because there is brought into play
no active change in the tissues of the second animal. The methods of active
immunity have been practically applied in _preventive inoculation_ against
disease; those of passive immunity have given us _serum therapeutics_. The
chief facts with regard to each may now be stated.

1. _Active Immunity_.--The key to the artificial establishment of active
immunity is given by the fact long established that recovery from an attack
of certain infective diseases is accompanied by protection for varying
periods of time against a subsequent attack. Hence follows the idea of
producing a modified attack of the disease as a means of prevention--a
principle which had been previously applied in inoculation against
smallpox. Immunity, however, probably results from certain substances
introduced into the system during the disease rather than from the disease
itself; for by properly adjusted doses of the poison (in the widest sense),
immunity may result without any symptoms of the disease occurring. Of the
chief methods used in producing active immunity the first is by inoculation
with bacteria whose virulence has been diminished, _i.e._ with an
"attenuated virus." Many of the earlier methods of attenuation were devised
in the case of the anthrax bacillus, an organism which is, however,
somewhat exceptional as regards the relative stability of its virulence.
Many such methods consist, to speak generally, in growing the organism
outside the body under somewhat unsuitable conditions, _e.g._ at higher
temperatures than the optimum, in the presence of weak antiseptics, &c. The
virulence of many organisms, however, becomes diminished when they are
grown on the ordinary artificial media, and the diminution is sometimes
accelerated by passing a current [v.03 p.0176] of air over the surface of
the growth. Sometimes also the virulence of a bacterium for a particular
kind of animal becomes lessened on passing it through the body of one of
another species. Cultures of varying degree of virulence may be obtained by
such methods, and immunity can be gradually increased by inoculation with
vaccines of increasing virulence. The immunity may be made to reach a very
high degree by ultimately using cultures of intensified virulence, this
"supervirulent" character being usually attained by the method of _passage_
already explained. A second method is by injection of the bacterium in the
dead condition, whereby immunity against the living organism may be
produced. Here manifestly the dose may be easily controlled, and may be
gradually increased in successive inoculations. This method has a wide
application. A third method is by injections of the separated toxins of a
bacterium, the resulting immunity being not only against the toxin, but, so
far as present knowledge shows, also against the living organism. In the
development of toxin-immunity the doses, small at first, are gradually
increased in successive inoculations; or, as in the case of very active
toxins, the initial injections are made with toxin modified by heat or by
the addition of various chemical substances. Immunity of the same nature
can be acquired in the same way against snake and scorpion poisons, and
against certain vegetable toxins, _e.g._ ricin, abrin, &c.

In order that the immunity may reach a high degree, either the bacterium in
a very virulent state or a large dose of toxin must ultimately be used in
the injections. In such cases the immunity is, to speak generally,
specific, _i.e._ applies only to the bacterium or toxin used in its
production. A certain degree of non-specific immunity or increased tissue
resistance may be produced locally, _e.g._ in the peritoneum, by injections
of non-pathogenic organisms, peptone, nucleic acid and various other
substances. In these cases the immunity is without specific character, and
cannot be transferred to another animal. Lastly, in a few instances one
organism has an antagonistic action to another; for example, the products
of _B. pyocyaneus_ have a certain protective action against _B. anthracis_.
This method has, however, not yielded any important practical application.

2. _Passive Immunity: Anti-sera._--The development of active immunity by
the above methods is essentially the result of a reactive process on the
part of the cells of the body, though as yet we know little of its real
nature. It is, however, also accompanied by the appearance of certain
bodies in the blood serum of the animal treated, to which the name of
_anti-substances_ is given, and these have been the subject of extensive
study. It is by means of them that immunity (passive) can be transferred to
a fresh animal. The development of anti-substances is, however, not
peculiar to bacteria, but occurs also when alien cells of various kinds,
proteins, ferments, &c., are injected. In fact, organic molecules can be
divided into two classes according as they give rise to anti-substances or
fail to do so. Amongst the latter, the vegetable poisons of known
constitution, alkaloids, glucosides, &c., are to be placed. The molecules
which lead to the production of anti-substances are usually known as
antigens, and each antigen has a specific combining affinity for its
corresponding anti-substance, fitting it as a lock does a key. The
antigens, as already indicated, may occur in bacteria, cells, &c., or they
may occur free in a fluid. Anti-substances may be arranged, as has been
done by Ehrlich, into three main groups. In the first group, the
anti-substance simply combines with the antigen, without, so far as we
know, producing any change in it. The antitoxins are examples of this
variety. In the second group, the anti-substance, in addition to combining
with the antigen, produces some recognizable physical change in it; the
precipitins and agglutinins may be mentioned as examples. In the third
group, the anti-substance, after it has combined with the antigen, leads to
the union of a third body called _complement_ (_alexine_ or _cytase_ of
French writers), which is present in normal serum. As a result of the union
of the three substances, a dissolving or digestive action is often to be
observed. This is the mode of action of the anti-substances in the case of
a haemolytic or bacteriolytic serum. So far as bacterial immunity is
concerned, the anti-serum exerts its action either on the toxin or on the
bacterium itself; that is, its action is either antitoxic or
anti-bacterial. The properties of these two kinds of serum may now be
considered.

[Sidenote: Antitoxic serum.]

The term "antitoxic" signifies that serum has the power of neutralizing the
action of the toxin, as is shown by mixing them together outside the body
and then injecting them into an animal. The antitoxic serum when injected
previously to the toxin also confers immunity (passive) against it; when
injected after the toxin it has within certain limits a curative action,
though in this case its dose requires to be large. The antitoxic property
is developed in a susceptible animal by successive and gradually increasing
doses of the toxin. In the earlier experiments on smaller animals the
potency of the toxin was modified for the first injections, but in
preparing antitoxin for therapeutical purposes the toxin is used in its
unaltered condition, the horse being the animal usually employed. The
injections are made subcutaneously and afterwards intravenously; and, while
the dose must be gradually increased, care must be taken that this is not
done too quickly, otherwise the antitoxic power of the serum may fall and
the health of the animal suffer. The serum of the animal is tested from
time to time against a known amount of toxin, _i.e._ is standardized. The
unit of antitoxin in Ehrlich's new standard is the amount requisite to
antagonize 100 times the minimum lethal dose of a particular toxin to a
guinea-pig of 250 grm. weight, the indication that the toxin has been
antagonized being that a fatal result does not follow within five days
after the injection. In the case of diphtheria the antitoxic power of the
serum may reach 800 units per cubic centimetre, or even more. The laws of
antitoxin production and action are not confined to bacterial toxins, but
apply also to other vegetable and animal toxins, resembling them in
constitution, viz. the vegetable toxalbumoses and the snake-venom group
referred to above.

[Sidenote: Action of antitoxin.]

The production of antitoxin is one of the most striking facts of biological
science, and two important questions with regard to it must next be
considered, viz. how does the antitoxin act? and how is it formed within
the body? Theoretically there are two possible modes of action: antitoxin
may act by means of the cells of the body, _i.e._ indirectly or
physiologically; or it may act directly on the toxin, _i.e._ chemically or
physically. The second view may now be said to be established, and, though
the question cannot be fully discussed here, the chief grounds in support
of a direct action may be given. (a) The action of antitoxin on toxin, as
tested by neutralization effects, takes place more quickly in concentrated
than in weak solutions, and more quickly at a warm (within certain limits)
than at a cold temperature. (b) Antitoxin acts more powerfully when
injected along with the toxin than when injected at the same time in
another part of the body; if its action were on the tissue-cells one would
expect that the site of injection would be immaterial. For example, the
amount necessary to neutralize five times the lethal dose being determined,
twenty times that amount will neutralize a hundred times the lethal dose.
In the case of physiological antagonism of drugs this relationship does not
hold. (c) It has been shown by C. J. Martin and Cherry, and by A. A.
Kanthack and Cobbett, that in certain instances the toxin can be made to
pass through a gelatine membrane, whereas the antitoxin cannot, its
molecules being of larger size. If, however, toxin be mixed with antitoxin
for some time, it can no longer be passed through, presumably because it
has become combined with the antitoxin.

Lastly it may be mentioned that when a toxin has some action which can be
demonstrated in a test-tube experiment, for example, a dissolving action on
red corpuscles, this action may be annulled by previously adding the
antitoxin to toxin; in such a case the intervention of the living tissues
is excluded. In view of the fact that antitoxin has a direct action on
toxin, we may say that theoretically this may take place in one of two
ways. It may produce a disintegration of the toxin molecule, or it may
combine with it to produce a body whose combining affinities are satisfied.
The latter view, first advocated by [v.03 p.0177] Ehrlich, harmonizes with
the facts established with regard to toxic action and the behaviour of
antitoxins, and may now be regarded as established. His view as to the dual
composition of the toxin molecule has already been mentioned, and it is
evident that if the haptophorous or combining group has its affinity
satisfied by union with antitoxin, the toxin will no longer combine with
living cells, and will thus be rendered harmless. One other important fact
in support of what has been stated is that a toxin may have its toxic
action diminished, and may still require the same amount of antitoxin as
previously for neutralization. This is readily intelligible on the
supposition that the toxophorous group is more labile than the
haptophorous. There is, however, still dispute with regard to the exact
nature of the union of toxin and antitoxin. Ehrlich's view is that the two
substances form a firm combination like a strong acid and a base. He found,
however, that if he took the largest amount of toxin which was just
neutralized by a given amount of antitoxin, much more than a single dose of
toxin had to be added before a single dose was left free. For example, if
100 doses of toxin were neutralized by a unit of antitoxin (_v. supra_) it
might be that 125 doses would need to be added to the same amount of
antitoxin before the mixture produced a fatal result when it was injected.
This result, which is usually known now as the "Ehrlich phenomenon," was
explained by him on the supposition that the "toxin" does not represent
molecules which are all the same, but contains molecules of different
degrees of combining affinity and of toxic action. Accordingly, the most
actively toxic molecules will be neutralized first, and those which are
left over, that is, uncombined with antitoxin, will have a weaker toxic
action. This view has been assailed by Thorvald Madsen and S. A. Arrhenius,
who hold that the union of toxin and antitoxin is comparatively loose, and
belongs to the class of reversible actions, being comparable in fact with
the union of a weak acid and base. If such were the condition there would
always be a certain amount both of free toxin and of free antitoxin in the
mixture, and in this case also considerably more than a dose of toxin would
have to be added to a "neutral mixture" before the amount of free toxin was
increased by a dose, that is, before the mixture became lethal. It may be
stated that while in certain instances the union of toxin and antitoxin may
be reversible, all the facts established cannot be explained on this simple
hypothesis of reversible action. Still another view, advocated by Bordet,
is that the union of toxin and antitoxin is rather of physical than of
strictly chemical nature, and represents an interaction of colloidal
substances, a sort of molecular deposition by which the smaller toxin
molecule becomes entangled in the larger molecule of antitoxin. Sufficient
has been said to show that the subject is one of great intricacy, and no
simple statement with regard to it is as yet possible. We are probably safe
in saying, however, that the molecules of a toxin are not identical but
vary in the degree of their combining affinities, and also in their toxic
action, and that, while in some cases the combination of anti-substances
has been shown to be reversible, we are far from being able to say that
this is a general law.

[Sidenote: Formation of antitoxin.]

The origin of antitoxin is of course merely a part of the general question
regarding the production of anti-substances in general, as these all
combine in the same way with their homologous substances and have the same
character of specificity. As, however, most of the work has been done with
regard to antitoxin production we may consider here the theoretical aspect
of the subject. There are three chief possibilities: (a) that the antitoxin
is a modification of the toxin; (b) that it is a substance normally
present, but produced in excess under stimulation of the toxin; (c) that it
is an entirely new product. The first of these, which would imply a process
of a very remarkable nature, is disproved by what is observed after
bleeding an animal whose blood contains antitoxin. In such a case it has
been shown that, without the introduction of fresh toxin, new antitoxin
appears, and therefore must be produced by the living tissues. The second
theory is the more probable _a priori_, and if established removes the
necessity for the third. It is strongly supported by Ehrlich, who, in his
so-called "side-chain" (_Seitenkette_) theory, explains antitoxin
production as an instance of regeneration after loss. Living protoplasm, or
in other words a biogen molecule, is regarded as consisting of a central
atom group (_Leistungskern_), related to which are numerous secondary atom
groups or side-chains, with unsatisfied chemical affinities. [Sidenote:
"Side-chain" theory.] The side-chains constitute the means by which other
molecules are added to the living molecule, _e.g._ in the process of
nutrition. It is by means of such side-chains that toxin molecules are
attached to the protoplasm, so that the living molecules are brought under
the action of the toxophorous groups of the toxins. In antitoxin production
this combination takes place, though not in sufficient amount to produce
serious toxic symptoms. It is further supposed that the combination being
of somewhat firm character, the side-chains thus combined are lost for the
purposes of the cell and are therefore thrown off. By the introduction of
fresh toxin the process is repeated and the regeneration of side-chains is
increased. Ultimately the regeneration becomes an over-regeneration and
free side-chains produced in excess are set free and appear in the blood as
antitoxin molecules. In other words the substances, which when forming part
of the cells fix the toxin to the cells, constitute antitoxin molecules
when free in the serum. This theory, though not yet established, certainly
affords the most satisfactory explanation at present available. In support
of it there is the remarkable fact, discovered by A. Wassermann and Takaki
in the case of tetanus, that there do exist in the nervous system molecules
with combining affinity for the tetanus toxin. If, for example, the brain
and spinal cord removed from an animal be bruised and brought into contact
with tetanus toxin, a certain amount of the toxicity disappears, as shown
by injecting the mixture into another animal. Further, these molecules in
the nervous system present the same susceptibility to heat and other
physical agencies as does tetanus antitoxin. There is therefore strong
evidence that antitoxin molecules do exist as part of the living substance
of nerve cells. It has, moreover, been found that the serum of various
animals has a certain amount of antitoxic action, and thus the basis for
antitoxin production, according to Ehrlich's theory, is afforded. The
theory also supplies the explanation of the power which an animal possesses
of producing various antitoxins, since this depends ultimately upon
susceptibility to toxic action. The explanation is thus carried back to the
complicated constitution of biogen molecules in various living cells of the
body. It may be added that in the case of all the other kinds of
anti-substances, which are produced by a corresponding reaction, we have
examples of the existence of traces of them in the blood serum under normal
conditions. We are, accordingly, justified in definitely concluding that
their appearance in large amount in the blood, as the result of active
immunization, represents an increased production of molecules which are
already present in the body, either in a free condition in its fluids or as
constituent elements of its cells.

[Sidenote: Anti-bacterial serum.]

In preparing anti-bacterial sera the lines of procedure correspond to those
followed in the case of antitoxins, but the bacteria themselves in the
living or dead condition or their maceration products are always used in
the injections. Sometimes dead bacteria, living virulent bacteria, and
living supervirulent bacteria, are used in succession, the object being to
arrive ultimately at a high dosage, though the details vary in different
instances. The serum of an animal thus actively immunized has powerful
protective properties towards another animal, the amount necessary for
protection being sometimes almost inconceivably small. As a rule it has no
action on the corresponding toxin, _i.e._ is not antitoxic. In addition to
the protective action, such a serum may possess activities which can be
demonstrated outside the body. Of these the most important are (a)
bacteriolytic or lysogenic action, (b) agglutinative action, and (c)
opsonic action.

[Sidenote: (a) Lysogenic action.]

The first of these, lysogenic or bacteriolytic action, consists in [v.03
p.0178] the production of a change in the corresponding bacterium whereby
it becomes granular, swells up and ultimately may undergo dissolution.
Pfeiffer was the first to show that this occurred when the bacterium was
injected into the peritoneal cavity of the animal immunized against it, and
also when a little of the serum of such an animal was injected with the
bacterium into the peritoneum of a fresh, _i.e._ non-immunized animal.
Metchnikoff and Bordet subsequently devised means by which a similar change
could be produced _in vitro_, and analysed the conditions necessary for its
occurrence. It has been completely established that in this phenomenon of
lysogenesis there are two substances concerned, one specially developed or
developed in excess, and the other present in normal serum. The former
(_Immunkörper_ of Ehrlich, _substance sensibilisatrice_ of Bordet) is the
more stable, resisting a temperature of 60° C., and though giving the
specific character to the reaction cannot act alone. The latter is
ferment-like and much more labile than the former, being readily destroyed
at 60° C. It may be added that the protective power is not lost by exposure
to the temperature mentioned, this apparently depending upon a specific
anti-substance. Furthermore, lysogenic action is not confined to the case
of bacteria but obtains also with other organized structures, _e.g._ red
corpuscles (Bordet, Ehrlich and Morgenroth), leucocytes and spermatozoa
(Metchnikoff). That is to say, if an animal be treated with injections of
these bodies, its serum acquires the power of dissolving or of producing
some disintegrative effect in them. The development of the immune body with
specific combining affinity thus presents an analogy to antitoxin
production, the difference being that in lysogenesis another substance is
necessary to complete the process. It can be shown that in many cases when
bacteria are injected the serum of the treated animal has no bacteriolytic
effect, and still an immune body is present, which leads to the fixation of
complement; in this case bacteriolysis does not occur, because the organism
is not susceptible to the action of the complement. In all cases the
important action is the binding of complement to the bacterium by means of
the corresponding immune body; whether or not death of the bacterium
occurs, will depend upon its susceptibility to the action of the particular
complement, the latter acting like a toxin or digestive ferment. It is to
be noted that in the process of immunization complement does not increase
in amount; accordingly the immune serum comes to contain immune body much
in excess of the amount of complement necessary to complete its action. An
important point with regard to the therapeutic application of an
anti-bacterial serum, is that when the serum is kept _in vitro_ the
complement rapidly disappears, and accordingly the complement necessary for
the production of the bactericidal action must be supplied by the blood of
the patient treated. This latter complement may not suit the immune body,
that is, may not be fixed to the bacterium by means of it, or if the latter
event does occur, may fail to bring about the death of the bacteria. These
circumstances serve, in part at least, to explain the fact that the success
attending the use of anti-bacterial sera has been much inferior to that in
the case of antitoxic sera.

[Sidenote: (b) Agglutination.]

Another property which may be possessed by an anti-bacterial serum is that
of agglutination. By this is meant the aggregation into clumps of the
bacteria uniformly distributed in an indifferent fluid; if the bacterium is
motile its movement is arrested during the process. The process is of
course observed by means of the microscope, but the clumps soon settle in
the fluid and ultimately form a sediment, leaving the upper part clear.
This change, visible to the naked eye, is called _sedimentation_. B. J. A.
Charrin and G. E. H. Roger first showed in the case of _B. pyocyaneus_ that
when a small quantity of the homologous serum (_i.e._ the serum of an
animal immunized against the bacterium) was added to a fluid culture of
this bacillus, growth formed a sediment instead of a uniform turbidity.
Gruber and Durham showed that sedimentation occurred when a small quantity
of the homologous serum was added to an emulsion of the bacterium in a
small test-tube, and found that this obtained in all cases where Pfeiffer's
lysogenic action could be demonstrated. Shortly afterwards Widal and also
Grünbaum showed that the serum of patients suffering from typhoid fever,
even at an early stage of the disease, agglutinated the typhoid bacillus--a
fact which laid the foundation of serum diagnosis. A similar phenomenon has
been demonstrated in the case of Malta fever, cholera, plague, infection
with _B. coli_, "meat-poisoning" due to Gärtner's bacillus, and various
other infections. As regards the mode of action of agglutinins, Gruber and
Durham considered that it consists in a change in the envelopes of the
bacteria, by which they swell up and become adhesive. The view has various
facts in its support, but F. Kruse and C. Nicolle have found that if a
bacterial culture be filtered germ-free, an agglutinating serum still
produces some change in it, so that particles suspended in it become
gathered into clumps. E. Duclaux, for this reason, considers that
agglutinins are coagulative ferments.

The phenomenon of agglutination depends essentially on the union of
molecules in the bacteria--the agglutinogens--with the corresponding
agglutinins, but another essential is the presence of a certain amount of
salts in the fluid, as it can be shown that when agglutinated masses of
bacteria are washed salt-free the clumps become resolved. The fact that
agglutinins appear in the body at an early stage in a disease has been
taken by some observers as indicating that they have nothing to do with
immunity, their development being spoken of as a reaction of infection.
This conclusion is not justified, as we must suppose that the process of
immunization begins to be developed at an early period in the disease, that
it gradually increases, and ultimately results in cure. It should also be
stated that agglutinins are used up in the process of agglutination,
apparently combining with some element of the bacterial structure. In view
of all the facts it must be admitted that the agglutinins and immune bodies
are the result of corresponding reactive processes, and are probably
related to one another. The development of all antagonistic substances
which confer the special character on antimicrobic sera, as well as
antitoxins, may be expressed as the formation of bodies with specific
combining affinity for the organic substance introduced into the
system--toxin, bacterium, red corpuscle, &c., as the case may be. The
bacterium, being a complex organic substance, may thus give rise to more
than one antagonistic or combining substance.

[Sidenote: (c) Opsonic action.]

By opsonic action is meant the effect which a serum has on bacteria in
making them more susceptible to phagocytosis by the white corpuscles of the
blood (_q.v._). Such an effect may be demonstrated outside the body by
making a suitable mixture of (a) a suspension of the particular bacterium,
(b) the serum to be tested, and (c) leucocytes of a normal animal or
person. The mixture is placed in a thin capillary tube and incubated at 37°
C. for half an hour; a film preparation is then made from it on a glass
slide, stained by a suitable method and then examined microscopically. The
number of bacteria contained within a number of, say fifty, leucocytes can
be counted and the average taken. In estimating the opsonic power of the
serum in cases of disease a control with normal serum is made at the same
time and under precisely the same conditions. The average number of
bacteria contained within leucocytes in the case tested, divided by the
number given by the normal serum, is called the _phagocytic index_. Wright
and Douglas showed that under these conditions phagocytosis might occur
when a small quantity of normal serum was present, whereas it was absent
when normal salt solution was substituted for the serum; the latter thus
contained substances which made the organisms susceptible to the action of
the phagocytosis. They further showed that this substance acted by
combining with the organisms and apparently producing some alteration in
them; on the other hand it had no direct action on the leucocytes. This
opsonin of normal serum is very labile, being rapidly destroyed at 55° C.;
that is, a serum heated at this temperature has practically no greater
effect in aiding phagocytosis than normal salt solution has. Various
observers had previously found that the serum of an animal immunized
against [v.03 p.0179] a particular bacterium had a special action in
bringing about phagocytosis of that organism, and it had been found that
this property was retained when the serum was heated at 55° C. It is now
generally admitted that at least two distinct classes of substances are
concerned in opsonic action, that thermostable immune opsonins are
developed as a result of active immunization and these possess the specific
properties of anti-substances in general, that is, act only on the
corresponding bacterium. On the contrary the labile opsonins of normal
serum have a comparatively general action on different organisms. It is
quite evident that the specific immune-opsonins may play a very important
part in the phenomena of immunity, as by their means the organisms are
taken up more actively by the phagocytic cells, and thereafter may undergo
rapid disintegration.

The opsonic action of the serum has been employed by Sir A. Wright and his
co-workers to control the treatment of bacterial infections by vaccines;
that is, by injections of varying amounts of a dead culture of the
corresponding bacterium. The object in such treatment is to raise the
opsonic index of the serum, this being taken as an indication of increased
immunity. The effect of the injection of a small quantity of vaccine is
usually to produce an increase in the opsonic index within a few days. If
then an additional quantity of vaccine be injected there occurs a fall in
the opsonic index (negative phase) which, however, is followed later by a
rise to a higher level than before. If the amounts of vaccine used and the
times of the injection are suitably chosen, there may thus be produced by a
series of steps a rise of the opsonic index to a high level. One of the
chief objects in registering the opsonic power in such cases is to avoid
the introduction of additional vaccine when the opsonic index is low, that
is, during the negative phase, as if this were done a further diminution of
the opsonic action might result. The principle in such treatment by means
of vaccines is to stimulate the general production of anti-substances
throughout the body, so that these may be carried to the sites of bacterial
growth, and aid the destruction of the organisms by means of the cells of
the tissues. A large number of favourable results obtained by such
treatment controlled by the observation of the opsonic index have already
been published, but it would be unwise at present to offer a decided
opinion as to the ultimate value of the method.

Active immunity has thus been shown to be associated with the presence of
certain anti-substances in the serum. After these substances have
disappeared, however, as they always do in the course of time, the animal
still possesses immunity for a varying period. This apparently depends upon
some alteration in the cells of the body, but its exact nature is not
known.

[Sidenote: Phagocytosis.]

The destruction of bacteria by direct cellular agency both in natural and
acquired immunity must not be overlooked. The behaviour of certain cells,
especially leucocytes, in infective conditions led Metchnikoff to place
great importance on phagocytosis. In this process there are two factors
concerned, viz. the ingestion of bacteria by the cells, and the subsequent
intracellular digestion. If either of these is wanting or interfered with,
phagocytosis will necessarily fail as a means of defence. As regards the
former, leucocytes are guided chiefly by chemiotaxis, _i.e._ by
sensitiveness to chemical substances in their surroundings--a property
which is not peculiar to them but is possessed by various unicellular
organisms, including motile bacteria. When the cell moves from a less to a
greater degree of concentration, _i.e._ towards the focus of production,
the chemiotaxis is termed positive; when the converse obtains, negative.
This apparently purposive movement has been pointed out by M. Verworn to
depend upon stimulation to contraction or the reverse. Metchnikoff showed
that in animals immune to a given organism phagocytosis is present, whereas
in susceptible animals it is deficient or absent. He also showed that the
development of artificial immunity is attended by the appearance of
phagocytosis; also, when an anti-serum is injected into an animal, the
phagocytes which formerly were indifferent might move towards and destroy
the bacteria. In the light of all the facts, however, especially those with
regard to anti-bacterial sera, the presence of phagocytosis cannot be
regarded as the essence of immunity, but rather the evidence of its
existence. The increased ingestion of bacteria in active immunity would
seem to depend upon the presence of immune opsonins in the serum. These, as
already explained, are true anti-substances. Thus the apparent increased
activity of the leucocytes is due to a preliminary effect of the opsonins
on the bacteria. We have no distinct proof that there occurs in active
immunity any education of the phagocytes, in Metchnikoff's sense, that is,
any increase of the inherent ingestive or digestive activity of these
cells. There is some evidence that in certain cases anti-substances may act
upon the leucocytes, and to these the name of "stimulins" has been given.
We cannot, however, say that these play an important part in immunity, and
even if it were so, the essential factor would be the development of the
substances which act in this way. While in immunity there probably occurs
no marked change in the leucocytes themselves, it must be admitted that the
increased destruction of bacteria by these cells is of the highest
importance. This, as already pointed out, depends upon the increase of
opsonins, though it is also to be noted that in many infective conditions
there is another factor present, namely a leucocytosis, that is, an
increase of the leucocytes in the blood, and the defensive powers of the
body are thereby increased. Evidence has been brought forward within recent
years that the leucocytes may constitute an important source of the
antagonistic substances which appear in the serum. Much of such evidence
possesses considerable weight, and seeing that these cells possess active
digestive powers it is by no means improbable that substances with
corresponding properties may be set free by them. To ascribe such powers to
them exclusively is, however, not justifiable. Probably the lining
endothelium of the blood-vessels as well as other tissues of the body
participate in the production of anti-substances.

[Sidenote: Natural immunity.]

The subject of artificial immunity has occupied a large proportion of
bacteriological literature within recent years, and our endeavour has been
mainly to indicate the general laws which are in process of evolution. When
the facts of natural immunity are examined, we find that no single
explanation is possible. Natural immunity against toxins must be taken into
account, and, if Ehrlich's view with regard to toxic action be correct,
this may depend upon either the absence of chemical affinity of the living
molecules of the tissues for the toxic molecule, or upon insensitiveness to
the action of the toxophorous group. It has been shown with regard to the
former, for example, that the nervous system of the fowl, which possesses
immunity against tetanus toxin, has little combining affinity for it. The
non-sensitiveness of a cell to a toxic body when brought into immediate
relationship cannot, however, be explained further than by saying that the
disintegrative changes which underlie symptoms of poisoning are not brought
about. Then as regards natural powers of destroying bacteria, phagocytosis
aided by chemiotaxis plays a part, and it can be understood that an animal
whose phagocytes are attracted by a particular bacterium will have an
advantage over one in which this action is absent. Variations in
chemiotaxis towards different organisms probably depend in natural
conditions, as well as in active immunity, upon the opsonic content of the
serum. Whether bacteria will be destroyed or not after they have been
ingested by the leucocytes will depend upon the digestive powers of the
latter, and these probably vary in different species of animals. The blood
serum has a direct bactericidal action on certain bacteria, as tested
outside the body, and this also varies in different animals. Observations
made on this property with respect to the anthrax bacillus at first gave
the hope that it might explain variations in natural immunity. Thus the
serum of the white rat, which is immune to anthrax, kills the bacillus;
whereas the serum of the guinea-pig, which is susceptible, has no such
effect. Further observations, however, showed that this does not hold as a
general law. The serum of the susceptible rabbit, for example, is
bactericidal to this organism, whilst the serum of the immune dog is not.
In the case of the latter animal the serum [v.03 p.0180] contains an
opsonin which leads to phagocytosis of the bacillus, and the latter is then
destroyed by the leucocytes. It is quite evident that bactericidal action
as tested _in vitro_ outside the body does not correspond to the degree of
immunity possessed by the animal under natural conditions. We may say,
however, that there are several factors concerned in natural immunity, of
which the most important may be said to be the three following, viz.
variations in the bactericidal action of the serum _in vivo_, variations in
the chemiotactic or opsonic properties of the serum _in vivo_, and
variations in the digestive properties of the leucocytes of the particular
animal. It is thus evident that the explanation of natural immunity in any
given instance may be a matter of difficulty and much complexity.

AUTHORITIES.--Bacteriological literature has become so extensive that it is
impossible to give here references to original articles, even the more
important. A number of these, giving an account of classical researches,
were translated from French and German, and published by the New Sydenham
Society under the title _Microparasites in Disease: Selected Essays_, in
1886. The following list contains some of the more important books
published within recent years. Abbott, _Principles of Bacteriology_ (7th
ed., London, 1905); Crookshank, _Bacteriology and Infective Diseases_ (with
bibliography, 4th ed., London, 1896); Duclaux, _Traité de microbiologie_
(Paris, 1899-1900); Eyre, _Bacteriological Technique_ (Philadelphia and
London, 1902); Flügge, _Die Mikroorganismen_ (3rd ed., Leipzig, 1896);
Fischer, _Vorlesungen über Bakterien_ (2nd ed., Jena, 1902); Günther,
_Einführung in das Studium der Bakteriologie_ (6th ed., Leipzig, 1906);
Hewlett, _Manual of Bacteriology_ (2nd ed., London, 1902); Hueppe,
_Principles of Bacteriology_ (translation, London, 1899); Klein,
_Micro-organisms and Disease_ (3rd ed., London, 1896); Kolle and
Wassermann, _Handbuch der pathogenen Mikroorganismen_ (Jena, 1904)
(supplements are still being published; this is the most important work on
the subject); Löffler, _Vorlesungen über die geschichtliche Entwickelung
der Lehre von der Bacterien_ (Leipzig, 1887); McFarland, _Text-book upon
the Pathogenic Bacteria_ (5th ed., London, 1906); Muir and Ritchie, _Manual
of Bacteriology_ (with bibliography, 4th ed., Edin. and Lond., 1908); Park,
_Pathogenic Micro-organisms_ (London, 1906); Sternberg, _Manual of
Bacteriology_ (with full bibliography, 2nd ed., New York, 1896); Woodhead,
_Bacteria and their products_ (with bibliography, London, 1891). The
bacteriology of the infective diseases (with bibliography) is fully given
in the _System of Medicine_, edited by Clifford Allbutt, (2nd ed., London,
1907). For references consult _Centralbl. für Bakter. u. Parasitenk._
(Jena); also _Index Medicus_. The most important works on immunity are:
Ehrlich, _Studies in Immunity_ (English translation, New York, 1906), and
Metchnikoff, _Immunity in Infective Diseases_ (English translation,
Cambridge, 1905).

(R. M.*)

[1] Gr. [Greek: baktêrion], Lat. _bacillus_, little rod or stick.

[2] _Cladothrix dichotoma_, for example, which is ordinarily a branched,
filamentous, sheathed form, at certain seasons breaks up into a number of
separate cells which develop a tuft of cilia and escape from the sheath.
Such a behaviour is very similar to the production of zoospores which is so
common in many filamentous algae.

[3] Brefeld has observed that a bacterium may divide once every half-hour,
and its progeny repeat the process in the same time. One bacterium might
thus produce in twenty-four hours a number of segments amounting to many
millions of millions.

[4] The difficulties presented by such minute and simple organisms as the
Schizomycetes are due partly to the few "characters" which they possess and
partly to the dangers of error in manipulating them; it is anything but an
easy matter either to trace the whole development of a single form or to
recognize with certainty any one stage in the development unless the others
are known. This being the case, and having regard to the minuteness and
ubiquity of these organisms, we should be very careful in accepting
evidence as to the continuity or otherwise of any two forms which falls
short of direct and uninterrupted observation. The outcome of all these
considerations is that, while recognizing that the "genera" and "species"
as defined by Cohn must be recast, we are not warranted in uniting any
forms the continuity of which has not been directly observed; or, at any
rate, the strictest rules should be followed in accepting the evidence
adduced to render the union of any forms probable.