BADAJOZ, the capital of the Spanish province described above; situated
close to the Portuguese frontier, on the left [v.03 p.0182] bank of the
river Guadiana, and the Madrid-Lisbon railway. Pop. (1900) 30,899. Badajoz
is the see of a bishop, and the official residence of the captain-general
of Estremadura. It occupies a slight eminence, crowned by the ruins of a
Moorish castle, and overlooking the Guadiana. A strong wall and bastions,
with a broad moat and outworks, and forts on the surrounding heights, give
the city an appearance of great strength. The river, which flows between
the castle-hill and the powerfully armed fort of San Cristobál, is crossed
by a magnificent granite bridge, originally built in 1460, repaired in 1597
and rebuilt in 1833. The whole aspect of Badajoz recalls its stormy
history; even the cathedral, built in 1258, resembles a fortress, with
massive embattled walls. Badajoz was the birthplace of the statesman Manuel
de Godoy, duke of Alcúdia (1767-1851), and of the painter Luis de Morales
(1509-1586). Two pictures by Morales, unfortunately retouched in modern
times, are preserved in the cathedral. Owing to its position the city
enjoys a considerable transit trade with Portugal; its other industries
include the manufacture of linen, woollen and leather goods, and of
pottery. It is not mentioned by any Roman historian, and first rose to
importance under Moorish rule. In 1031 it became the capital of a small
Moorish kingdom, and, though temporarily held by the Portuguese in 1168, it
retained its independence until 1229, when it was captured by Alphonso IX.
of Leon. As a frontier fortress it underwent many sieges. It was
beleaguered by the Portuguese in 1660, and in 1705 by the Allies in the War
of the Spanish Succession. During the Peninsular War Badajoz was
unsuccessfully attacked by the French in 1808 and 1809; but on the 10th of
March 1811, the Spanish commander, José Imaz, was bribed into surrendering
to the French force under Marshal Soult. A British army, commanded by
Marshal Beresford, endeavoured to retake it, and on the 16th of May
defeated a relieving force at Albuera, but the siege was abandoned in June.
The fortress was finally stormed on the 6th of April 1812, by the British
under Lord Wellington, and carried with terrible loss. It was then
delivered up to a two day's pillage. A military and republican rising took
place here in August 1883, but completely failed.