BADDELEY, ROBERT (_c._ 1732-1794), English actor, is said to have been
first a cook to Samuel Foote, "the English Aristophanes," and then a valet,
before he appeared on the stage. In 1761, described as "of Drury Lane
theatre," he was seen at the theatre in Smock Alley, Dublin, as Gomez in
Dryden's _Spanish Friar_. Two years later he was a regular member of the
Drury Lane company in London, where he had a great success in the low
comedy and servants' parts. He remained at this theatre and the Haymarket
until his death. He was the original Moses in the _School for Scandal_.
Baddeley died on the 20th of November 1794. He bequeathed property to found
a home for decayed actors, and also £3 per annum to provide wine and cake
in the green-room of Drury Lane theatre on Twelfth Night. The ceremony of
the Baddeley cake has remained a regular institution.

His wife SOPHIA BADDELEY (1745-1786), an actress and singer, was born in
London, the daughter of a sergeant-trumpeter named Snow. She was a woman of
great beauty, but excessive vanity and notorious conduct. At the age of
eighteen she ran away with Baddeley, then acting at Drury Lane, and she
herself made her first appearance on the stage there on the 27th of April
1765, as Ophelia. Later, as a singer, she obtained engagements at Ranelagh
and Vauxhall. Though separated from her husband on account of her
misconduct, she still played several years in the same company. Her beauty
and her extravagance rendered her celebrated, but the money which she made
in all sorts of ways was so freely squandered that she was obliged to take
refuge from her creditors in Edinburgh, where she made her last appearance
on the stage in 1784.

See _Memoirs of Mistress Sophia Baddeley_, by Mrs Elizabeth Steele, 6 vols.
(1781).