BADHAM, CHARLES (1813-1884), English scholar, was born at Ludlow, in
Shropshire, on the 18th of July 1813. His father, Charles Badham,
translator of Juvenal and an excellent classical scholar, was regius
professor of physic at Glasgow; his mother was a cousin of Thomas Campbell,
the poet. When about seven [v.03 p.0189] years old, Badham was sent to
Switzerland, where he became a pupil of Pestalozzi. He was afterwards
transferred to Eton, and in 1830 was elected to a scholarship at Wadham
College, Oxford, but only obtained a third class in classics (1836), a
failure which may have been due to his dislike of the methods of study then
in fashion at Oxford, at a time when classical scholarship was in a very
unsatisfactory condition. Shortly after taking his degree in 1837 Badham
went to Italy, where he occupied himself in the study of ancient MSS., in
particular those of the Vatican library. It was here that he began a
life-long friendship with G. C. Cobet. He afterwards spent some time in
Germany, and on his return to England was incorporated M.A. at Peterhouse,
Cambridge, in 1847. Having taken holy orders, he was appointed headmaster
of Louth grammar school, Lincolnshire (1851-1854), and subsequently
headmaster of Edgbaston proprietary school, near Birmingham. In the
interval he had taken the degree of D.D. at Cambridge (1852). In 1860 he
received the honorary degree of doctor of letters at the university of
Leiden. In 1866 he left England to take up the professorship of classics
and logic in Sydney University, which he held until his death on the 26th
of February 1884. He was twice married. Dr Badham's classical attainments
were recognized by the most famous European critics, such as G. C. Cobet,
Ludwig Preller, W. Dindorf, F. W. Schneidewin, J. A. F. Meineke, A. Ritschl
and Tischendorf. Like many schoolmasters who are good scholars and even
good teachers, he was not a professional success; and his hasty temper and
dislike of anything approaching disingenuousness may have stood in the way
of his advancement. But it is strange that a scholar and textual critic of
his eminence and of European reputation should have made comparatively
little mark in his native country. He published editions of Euripides,
_Helena_ and _Iphigenia in Tauris_ (1851), _Ion_ (1851); Plato's _Philebus_
(1855, 1878); _Laches_ and _Euthydemus_ (1865), _Phaedrus_ (1851),
_Symposium_ (1866) and _De Platonis Epistolis_ (1866). He also contributed
to _Mnemosyne_ (Cobet's journal) and other classical periodicals. His
_Adhortatio ad Discipulos Academiae Sydniensis_ (1869) contains a number of
emendations of Thucydides and other classical authors. He also published an
article on "The Text of Shakespere" in _Cambridge Essays_ (1856);
_Criticism applied to Shakespere_ (1846); _Thoughts on Classical and
Commercial Education_ (1864).

A collected edition of his _Speeches and Lectures delivered in Australia_
(Sydney, 1890) contains a memoir by Thomas Butler.