BAETYLUS (Gr. [Greek: baitulos, baitulion]), a word of Semitic origin (=
bethel) denoting a sacred stone, which was supposed to be endowed with
life. These fetish objects of worship were meteoric stones, which were
dedicated to the gods or revered as symbols of the gods themselves (Pliny,
_Nat. Hist._ xvii. 9; Photius, _Cod._ 242). [v.03 p.0192] In Greek
mythology the term was specially applied to the stone supposed to have been
swallowed by Cronus (who feared misfortune from his own children) in
mistake for his infant son Zeus, for whom it had been substituted by Uranus
and Gaea, his wife's parents (_Etymologicum Magnum_, s.v.). This stone was
carefully preserved at Delphi, anointed with oil every day and on festal
occasions covered with raw wool (Pausanias x. 24). In Phoenician mythology,
one of the sons of Uranus is named Baetylus. Another famous stone was the
effigy of Rhea Cybele, the holy stone of Pessinus, black and of irregular
form, which was brought to Rome in 204 B.C. and placed in the mouth of the
statue of the goddess. In some cases an attempt was made to give a more
regular form to the original shapeless stone: thus Apollo Agyieus was
represented by a conical pillar with pointed end, Zeus Meilichius in the
form of a pyramid. Other famous baetylic idols were those in the temples of
Zeus Casius at Seleucia, and of Zeus Teleios at Tegea. Even in the
declining years of paganism, these idols still retained their significance,
as is shown by the attacks upon them by ecclesiastical writers.

See Munter, _Über die vom Himmel gefallenen Steine_ (1805); Bösigk, _De
Baetyliis_ (1854); and the exhaustive article by F. Lenormant in Daremberg
and Saglio's _Dictionary of Antiquities_.