BAG-PIPE (Celt. _piob-mala_, _ullan-piob_, _cuislean_, _cuislin_; Fr.
_cornemuse_, _chalemie_, _musette_, _sourdeline_, _chevrette_, _loure_;
Ger. _Sackpfeife_, _Dudelsack_; M. H. Ger. _Suegdbalch_[1]; Ital.
_cornamusa_, _piva_, _sampogna_, _surdelina_; Gr. [Greek: askaulos] (?);
Lat. _ascaulus_ (?), _tibia utricularis_, _utricularium_; med. Lat.
_chorus_), a complex reed instrument of great antiquity. The bag-pipe forms
the link between the syrinx (_q.v._) and the primitive organ, by furnishing
the principle of the reservoir for the wind-supply, combined with a simple
method of regulating the sound-producing pressure by means of the arm of
the performer. The bag-pipes consists of an air-tight leather bag having
three to five apertures, each of which contains a fixed stock or short
tube. The stocks act as sockets for the reception of the pipes, and as
air-chambers for the accommodation and protection of the reeds. The pipes
are of three kinds: (1) a simple valved insufflation tube or "blow-pipe,"
by means of which the performer fills the bag reservoir; (2) the "chaunter"
(chanter) or the melody-pipe, having according to the variety of the
bag-pipe a conical or a cylindrical bore, lateral holes, and in some cases
keys and a bell; the "chaunter" is invariably made to speak by means of a
double-reed; (3) the "drones," jointed pipes with cylindrical bore,
generally terminating in a bell, but having no lateral holes and being
capable, therefore, of producing but one fixed note.

The main characteristic of the bag-pipe is the drone ground bass which
sounds without intermission. Each drone is fitted with a beating-reed
resembling the primitive "squeaker" known to all country lads; it is
prepared by making a cut partly across a piece of cane or reed, near the
open end, and splitting back from this towards a joint or knot, thus
raising a tongue or flap. The beating-reed is then fixed in a socket of the
drone, which fits into the stock. The sound is produced by the stream of
air forced from the bag into the drone-pipe by the pressure of the
performer's arm, causing the tongue of reed to vibrate over the aperture,
thus setting the whole column of air in vibration. The drone-pipe, like all
cylindrical tubes with reed mouthpieces, has the acoustic properties of the
closed pipe and produces the note of a pipe twice its length. The drones
are tuned by means of sliding-joints.

[v.03 p.0203] The blow-pipe and the chaunter occupy positions at opposite
extremities of the bag, which rests under the arm of the performer while
the drones point over his shoulder. These are the main features in the
construction of the bag-pipe, whose numerous varieties fall into two
classes according to the method of inflating the bag: (1) by means of the
blow-pipe described above; (2) by means of a small bellows connected by a
valved feed-pipe with the bag and worked by the other arm or elbow to which
it is attached by a ribbon or strap.

Class I. comprises: (a) the Highland bag-pipe; (b) the old Irish bag-pipe;
(c) the cornemuse; (d) the bignou or biniou (Breton bag-pipe); (e) the
Calabrian bag-pipe; (f) the ascaulus of the Greeks and Romans; (g) the
tibia utricularis; (h) the chorus. To Class II. belong: (a) the musette;
(b) the Northumbrian or border bag-pipe; (c) the Lowland bag-pipe; (d) the
union pipes of Ireland; (e) the surdelina of Naples.

1. _The Highland Bag-pipe._--The construction of the Highland pipes is
practically that given above. The chaunter consists of a conical wooden
tube terminating in a bell and measuring from 14 to 16 in. including the
reed. There are seven holes in front and one at the back for the thumb of
the left hand, which fingers the upper holes while the right thumb merely
supports the instrument. The holes are stopped by the under part of the
joints of the fingers. There is in addition a double hole near the bell,
which is never covered, and merely serves to regulate the pitch. As the
double reed is not manipulated by the lips of the performer, only nine
notes are obtained from the chaunter, as shown:--[2][3]

[Illustration]

The notes do not form any known diatonic scale, for in addition to the C
and F being too sharp, the notes are not strictly in tune with each other.
Donald MacDonald, in his treatise on the bag-pipe[4] states that "the piper
is to pay no attention to the flats and sharps marked on the clef, as they
are not used in pipe music; yet the pipe imitates several different keys
which are real, but ideal on the bag-pipe, as the music cannot be
transposed for it into any other key than that in which it is first played
or marked." Mr Glen, the great dealer in bag-pipes, gave it as his opinion
"that if the chaunter were to be made perfect in any one scale, it would
not go well with the drones. Also, there would not be nearly so much music
produced (if you take into consideration that it has only nine invariable
notes) as at present it adapts itself to the keys of A maj., D maj., B
min., G maj., E min. and A min. Of course we do not mean that it has all
the intervals necessary to form scales in all those keys, but that we find
it playing tunes that are in one or other of them."[5] Mr Ellis considers
that the natural scale of the chaunter of the bag-pipe corresponds most
nearly with the Arab scale of Zalzal, a celebrated lutist who died c. A.D.
800.

The three drones are usually tuned to A, the two smallest one octave below
the A of the chaunter, and the largest two octaves below. The three
principal methods of tuning the drones are shown as follows:--[6][7]

[Illustration]

The excessive use of ornamental notes on the Highland bag-pipe has arisen
from a technical peculiarity of the instrument, which makes a repetition of
the same note difficult without the interpolation of what is known among
pipers as "cuts" or "warblers," _i.e._ grace notes fingered with great
rapidity (see below for an example). These warblers, which consist not only
of single notes but of groups of from three to seven notes, not consecutive
but in leaps, assist in relieving the constant discord with the drone bass.
Skilful pipers have been known to introduce warblers of as many as eleven
notes between two beats in a bar.

[Illustration]

The use of musical notation for the Highland pipe tunes is a recent
innovation; the pipers used verbal equivalents for the notes; for instance,
the piobaireachd _Coghiegh nha Shie_, "War of peace,"[8] which opens as
shown here, was taken down by Capt. Niel MacLeod from the piper John
McCrummen of Skye as verbally taught to apprentices as follows:--

 "Hodroho, hodroho, haninin, hiechin,
  Hodroha, hodroho, hodroho, hachin,
  Hiodroho, hodroho, haninin, hiechin," &c.

The conclusion of the tune is thus expressed:

 "Hiundratatateriri, hiendatatateriri, hiundratatateriri,
     hiundratatateriri."[9]

Written down this seems a mere unintelligible jumble, but could we hear it,
as sounded by the pipers, with due regard for the rhythmical value of
notes, it would be a very different matter. Alexander Campbell[10] relates
that a melody had to be taken down or translated "from the syllabic jargon
of illiterate pipers into musical characters, which, when correctly done,
he found to his astonishment to coincide exactly with musical notation."

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--(1) Cornemuse. (2) Irish bag-pipe. (3) Musette. (4)
Highland bag-pipe, A.D. 1409. (5) Border bag-pipe.

(From Capt. C. R. Day's _Descriptive Catalogue of Musical Instruments
exhibited at the Royal Military Exhibition_, by permission of Eyre &
Spottiswoode.)]

A Highland bag-pipe of the 15th century, dated MCCCCIX., in the possession
of Messrs J. & R. Glen of Edinburgh, was exhibited at the Royal Military
Exhibition in London in 1890[11] (see fig. 1 (4)). There were two drones,
inserted in a single stock in the form of a wide-spread fork, and tuned to
A in unison with the lowest note of the chaunter, which had seven
finger-holes in front and a thumb-hole at the back.

_The old Irish Bag-pipe._--Very little is known about this instrument. It
is mentioned in the ancient Brehon Laws, said to date from the 5th century
(they are cited in compilations of the 10th century), in describing the
order of precedence of the king's bodyguard and household in the _Crith
Gabhlach_: "Poets, harpers, _pipers_, horn-blowers and jugglers have their
place in the south-east part of the house."[12] The word used for (bag-)
pipers is _Cuislennaïgh_, a word associated with reed instruments
(_cuiscrigh_ = reeds; O'Reilly's _Irish-English Dictionary_, Dublin, 1864).
The old Irish bag-pipe, of which we possess an illustration dated 1581,[13]
had a long conical chaunter with a bell and apparently seven holes in front
and a thumb-hole behind; there were two drones of different lengths--one
very long--both set in the same stock. It is exceedingly difficult to
procure any accurate information concerning the development of the bag-pipe
in Ireland until it assumed the present form, known as the union-pipes,
which belong to Class II.

[v.03 p.0204] The _cornemuse_ and _chalemie_ were the bag-pipes in use in
France, Italy and the Netherlands before the advent of the _musette_, to
which they bear the same relation as the old Irish bag-pipe does to the
union-pipes, or the _cornemusa_ or _piva_ to the _sampogna_ or _surdelina_
in Italy. Two kinds of cornemuses were known in France during the 16th and
17th centuries, differing in one important structural detail, which
affected the timbre of the instruments. Père Marin Mersenne[14] has given a
detailed description of these varieties and of the musette, with very clear
illustrations of the instruments and all their parts. The cornemuse or
chalemie used by shepherds, and as a solo instrument (see fig. 1 (1)), was
similar to the Highland bag-pipe; it consisted of a leather bag, inflated
by means of a valved blow-pipe; a large drone (_gros bourdon_) 2½ ft. long
included the beating-reed, which measured 2½ in., and was fixed in the
stock; the small drone (_petit bourdon_), 1 ft. in length including a reed
2 in. long, also had a beating-reed and was fixed in the same stock as the
chaunter. The two drones were tuned to C. [Notation: Gros bourdon C2. Petit
bourdon C3.] The chaunter had a conical bore and a double reed like an
oboe, but hidden within the stock; it could be taken out and played
separately, when the compass given by the eight holes (seven in front and a
thumb-hole) C to C' could be increased by a third to E, by overblowing the
D and E an octave by pressure of the breath and lips on the reed, now taken
directly into the mouth. [Notation: C4 C5 or E5.] The second kind of
cornemuse was played only in concert with a family of instruments known as
_Hautbois de Poitou_, a hautbois having the reed enclosed in an
air-chamber, just as is the case with the reeds of the bag-pipe. This
cornemuse had but one drone which could, like the others, be lengthened for
tuning by drawing out the joint; the reed was not a beating-reed but a
double reed like that of the chaunter; this constitutes the main difference
between the two cornemuses. The chaunter had eight holes, the lowest of
which was covered by a key enclosed in a perforated box.

[Illustration: Sackpfeife or Dudelsack. Drone G1. Chaunter G2 to G3.]

[Illustration: Bock. Drone C2. Chaunter B2-C3 to C4.]

The _Sackpfeife_ or _Dudelsack_ of Germany was an instrument of some
importance made in no less than five sizes, all described and illustrated
by Michael Praetorius.[15] They consist of the _Grosser Bock_ or
double-bass bag-pipe, a formidable-looking instrument with a single
cylindrical drone of a great length, terminating, as did the chaunter also,
in a curved ram's horn (to which the name was due). The chaunter had seven
finger-holes and a vent-hole in front, and a thumb-hole at the back. The
drone was tuned to G, an octave below the chaunter.

The _Bock_, of similar construction, was pitched a fourth higher in C.

[Illustration: Schäferpfeife. Drones B3b F4. Compass of chaunter F4 to F5.]

[Illustration: Hümmelchen. Drones F4 C5. Compass of chaunter C5 to C6]

The _Schäferpfeife_ had two drones in B flat and F. Praetorius explains
that the upper notes of the chaunter of this sackpfeife had a faulty
intonation which could not be corrected owing to the absence of the
thumb-hole, usual in all other varieties of the instrument.

The _Hümmelchen_ had two drones tuned to F and C.

The _Dudey_ or treble sackpfeife was the smallest of the family, and had
three drones tuned to E flat, B flat and E flat, and a chaunter with a
compass ranging from F or E flat to C or D.

[Illustration: Drones E4b B4b E5b. Compass of chaunter F5 to C6 or E5b to
D6.]

Praetorius also mentions a different kind of sackpfeife he saw in Magdeburg
(see _op. cit. Theatrum_, pl. v., No. 4), which was somewhat larger than
the schäferpfeife and pitched a third lower. There were two chaunters
mounted in one stock, each having three holes in front and one for the
thumb at the back. The right-hand chaunter sounded the five notes D, E, F,
G, A, and the left-hand chaunter, G, A, B, C, D. [Notation: Drones G3 D4.
Compass of chaunter D4 D5.] The performer was thus able to play simple
two-part melodies on the Magdeburg bag-pipe. Praetorius mentions in
addition the French bag-pipe (_musette_), similar in pitch to the
hümmelchen, but inflated by means of the bellows.

The _Calabrian bag-pipe_ has a bag of goatskin with the hair left on, and
is inflated by means of a blow-pipe. There are two drones and two
chaunters, all fixed in one stock. Each chaunter has three or four
finger-holes and the right-hand pipe has the fourth covered by a key
enclosed in a perforated box; both drones and chaunter have double reeds.

The ancient Greek bag-pipe (see ASKAULES), and the Roman _tibia
utricularis_, belonged to this class of instrument, inflated by the mouth,
but it is not certain that they had drones (see below, _History_).

II. The second class of instruments, inflated by means of a small bellows
worked by the arm, has as prototype the _musette_ (see fig. 1 (3)), which
is said to have been evolved during the 15th century;[16] from the end of
the 15th century there were always musette players[17] at the French court,
and we find the instrument fully developed at the beginning of the 17th
century when Mersenne[18] gives a full description of all its parts. The
chief characteristic of the musette was a certain rustic Watteau-like
grace. The face of the performer was no longer distorted by inflating the
bag; for the long cumbersome drones was substituted a short barrel droner,
containing the necessary lengths of tubing for four or five drones, reduced
to the smallest and most compact form. The bores were pierced
longitudinally through the thickness of the wood in parallel channels,
communicating with each other in twos or threes and providing the requisite
length for each drone. The reeds were double "hautbois" reeds all set in a
wooden stock or box within the bag; by means of regulators or slides,
called _layettes_, moving up and down in longitudinal grooves round the
circumference of the barrel, the length of the drone pipes could be so
regulated that a simple harmonic bass, consisting mainly of the common
chord, could be obtained. The chaunter, of narrow cylindrical bore, was
also furnished with a double reed and had eleven holes, four of which had
keys, giving a compass of twelve notes from F to C. [Notation: F4 to C6.]
This number of holes was not invariable. After Mersenne's time, Jean
Hotteterre (d. 1678), a court musician, belonging to the band known as the
_Musique de la Grande Écurie_,[19] in which he played the _dessus de
hautbois_, introduced certain improvements in the drones of the
musette.[20] His son Martin Hotteterre (d. 1712) added a second chaunter to
the musette, shorter than the first, to which it was attached instead of
being inserted into the stock. The Hotteterre chaunter, known as le _petit
chalumeau_, had six keys, whereas the _grand chalumeau_ had seven, besides
eight finger-holes and a vent-hole in the bell. All these keys were
actuated by the little finger of the left hand and the thumb of the right
hand, which were not required to stop holes on the large chaunter. The
_grand_ and _petit chalumeaux_ are figured in detail with keys and holes in
a rare and anonymous work by Borjon (or Bourgeon[21]), who gives much
interesting information concerning one of the most popular instruments of
his day. The bellows, he states, borrowed from the organ, were added to the
musette about forty or fifty years before he wrote his treatise. The
compass of the improved musette of Hotteterre was as shown:--

[Illustration: 0:F4 1:G4 2:A4 3:B4 4:C5 5:D5 6:E5 7:F5 8:G5.] the eight
holes of the grand chalumeau.

[Illustration: G4# B4b C5# E5b F5# G5# A5.] the seven keys of the grand
chalumeau.

[Illustration: G5# A5 A5# B5 C6 D6.] the six keys of the petit chalumeau.

The four or five drones were usually tuned thus:

[Illustration: C3 G3 C4 G4 C5.]

The chaunters and drones were pierced with a very narrow cylindrical bore,
and double reeds were used throughout, causing them to speak as closed
pipes, which accounts for the deep pitch of these relatively short pipes
(see AULOS). Martin Hotteterre was hardly the first to introduce the second
chaunter for the bag-pipe, since [v.03 p.0205] Praetorius in 1618 figures
and describes the Magdeburg _sackpfeife_ with two chaunters, but without
keys and with a conical bore.

The _surdelina_ or _sampogna_ is described and illustrated by Mersenne[22]
as the _musette de Naples_; its construction was very complicated. Mersenne
states that the instrument was invented by Jean Baptiste Riva (who was
living in Paris in 1620), Dom Julio and Vincenze; but Mersenne seems to
have made alterations himself in the original instrument, which are not
very clearly explained. There were two chaunters with narrow cylindrical
bore and having both finger-holes and keys; and two drones each having ten
keys. The four pipes were fixed in the same stock, and double reeds were
used throughout; the bag was inflated by means of bellows. Passenti of
Venice published a collection of melodies for the zampogna in 1628, under
the title of _Canora Zampogna_.

The modern _Lowland bag-pipe_ differs from the Highland bag-pipe mainly in
that it is blown by bellows instead of by the mouth.

The _Northumbrian_ or _Border bag-pipe_, also blown by means of bellows, is
chiefly distinguished by having a chaunter stopped at the lower end so that
when all the holes are closed, the pipe is silent. There are seven
finger-holes, one for the thumb, and a varying number of keys. The four
drones are fixed in one stock and are tuned by means of stoppers, so that,
as in the musette, any one of them may be silenced. A fine Northumbrian
bag-pipe[23] from the collection of the Rev. F. W. Galpin is illustrated
(fig. 1. (5)).

The union pipes of the 18th century, or modern _Irish bag-pipe_, blown by
bellows (see fig. 1. (2)), had one chaunter with seven finger-holes, one
thumb-hole and eight keys, which together gave the chromatic scale in two
octaves. The drones were tuned to A in different octaves, and three
regulators or drones with keys, played by the elbow, produced a kind of
harmony; the regulators correspond to the sliders on the drone-barrel of
the musette.

_History of the Bag-pipe_.--There is reason to believe that the origin of
the bag-pipe must be sought in remote antiquity. No instrument in any
degree similar to it is represented on any of the monuments of Egypt or
Assyria known at the present day; we are, nevertheless, able to trace it in
ancient Persia and by inference in Egypt, in Chaldaea and in ancient
Greece. The most characteristic feature of the bag-pipe is not the obvious
bag or air-reservoir from which the instrument derives its name in most
languages, but the fixed harmony of the buzzing drones. The principle of
the drone, _i.e._ the beating-reed sunk some three inches down the pipe,
was known to the ancient Egyptians. In a pipe discovered in a mummy-case
and now in the museum at Turin, was found a straw beating-reed in position.
The arghoul (_q.v._), a modern Egyptian instrument, possesses the
characteristic feature of drone and chaunter without the bag. The same
instrument occurs once in the hieroglyphs, being sounded _as-it_, and once
on a mural painting preserved in the Musée Guimet and reproduced by Victor
Loret.[24] During Jacques de Morgan's excavations in Persia some terracotta
figures of musicians, dating from the 8th century B.C., were discovered in
a _tell_ (mound) at Susa,[25] two of which appear to be playing bag-pipes;
the chaunter, curved in the shape of a hook from the stock, is clearly
visible, the bag under the arm is indicated, and the lips are pursed as if
in the act of blowing, but the insufflation tube is absent; a round hole in
one of the figures suggests its presence formerly.

Among the names of musical instruments in Daniel iii. 5 and 15, the sixth,
generally but wrongly rendered "dulcimer," is thought by many scholars to
signify a kind of bag-pipe (see commentaries on _Daniel_ and the
theological encyc.). This belief is based on the supposition that the
Aramaic _sump[=o]ny[=a]_ is a loan-word from the Greek, being a
mispronunciation of [Greek: sumphonia]. The argument is, however,
exceedingly weak. In the first place, the date of the book of Daniel is
matter of controversy, hingeing partly on precisely such questions as the
true significance and derivation of _sump[=o]ny[=a]_. Second, it is
possible that the word _sump[=o]ny[=a]_ is a late interpolation. Third, its
exact form is uncertain; in verse 10, _sipp[=o]ny[=a]_ is used of the same
instrument, suggesting a derivation from the Gr. [Greek: siphon] (tube or
pipe). Fourth, even if [Greek: sumphonia] is the source of the word, there
is very little evidence that it was used for any particular instrument. The
original natural sense of [Greek: sumphonia] is "concord of sound," "a
concordant interval," and the evidence of its use for a particular
instrument is of the 2nd century B.C., and, even so, very slight. Only one
passage (Polyb. xxvi. 10. 5) really bears on the question, and there the
translation of the word depends on a context the reading of which is
uncertain (see SYMPHONIA). It is, however, curious that the bag-pipe was
known in Italy and Spain during the middle ages, the two countries through
which Eastern culture was introduced into Europe, by the name of _zampogna_
or _sampogna_, which strongly recall the Chaldaean _sump[=o]ny[=a]_; and
further that in the same countries the word _sinfonia_ should be coexistent
with _zampogna_ and have the original meaning attached to the classical
[Greek: sumphonia], "a concord of sound." A single passage only in Dion
Chrysostom (see ASKAULES) is enough to prove that the instrument was known
in Greece in A.D. 100.[26] The Greeks had undoubtedly received some kind of
bag-pipe from Egypt (in the form of the _as-it_), or from Chaldaea, but it
remained a rustic instrument used only by shepherds and peasants. This
conclusion is supported by allusions in Aristophanes and in Plato's
_Crito_, which undoubtedly refer to the drone: "This, dear Crito, is the
voice which I seem to hear murmuring in my ears like the sound of the flute
(_aulos_) in the ears of the mystic; that voice, I say, is humming in my
ears."[27] Aristophanes, in his play _The Acharnians_, indulges in a flight
of satire at the expense of the musical Boeotians, by making a band of
Theban pipers play a Boeotian merchant and his slave into town. The
musicians are dubbed "bumblebee pipers" ([Greek: bombaulioi], l. 866) by
the exasperated inhabitants. The verb used here for "blowing" is [Greek:
phusan], the very word applied to blowing or inflating the bellows ([Greek:
phusa]), and not the usual verb [Greek: aulein], to play the aulos. Another
instrument, mentioned by Aristophanes in _Lysistrata_ (ll. 1242 and 1245),
which was probably a kind of bag-pipe, is also derived from [Greek: phusa],
_i.e._ _physallis_, the "concrete,"[28] and _physateria_[29] the
"collective"[28] form of the instrument. We leave the realm of inference
for that of certainty when we reach the reign of Nero, who had a passion
for the _Hydraulus_ (see ORGAN: _History_) and the _tibia utricularis_.[30]
That the bag-pipe was introduced by the Romans into the British Isles is a
conclusion supported by the discovery in the foundations of the praetorian
camp at Richborough of a small bronze figure of a Roman soldier playing the
tibia utricularis. The Rev. Stephen Weston, who made a communication on the
subject to _Archaeologia_,[31] points out further the interesting fact in
connexion with the instrument, that the Romans had instituted colleges for
training pipers on the bag-pipe, a practice followed in the Highlands in
the 18th century and notably in Skye. Gruterus[32] mentions among the
fraternities a _Corpus et Collegium Utriculariorum_, and Spon[33] also
quotes the _Collegio Utricular_. The bag-pipe in question appears to have
two drones in front pointing towards the right shoulder, and although no
chaunter is shown in the design, both hands are held in correct positions
over the spot where it ought to be; it may have been broken off. The bronze
figure has been reproduced from drawings by Edward King in three
positions.[34] The statement made by several writers on music that a
bag-pipe is represented on a contorniate of Nero is erroneous, as a
verification of certain references will show.[35] The error is due in the
first place to [v.03 p.0206] Montfaucon, who misunderstood the explanation
of Bianchini's drawing which he reproduced. The contorniate referred to is
one containing the hydraulic organ, and the legend _Laurentinus Aug_., but
no bag-pipe. Bianchini gives a drawing of a bag-pipe with two long drones,
which, he says, was copied from a marble relief over the gateway of the
palace of the prince of Santa Croce in Rome, near the church of San Carlo
ad Catinarios. If the drawing be accurate and the sculpture of classical
Roman period, it would corroborate the details of the instrument held by
the little bronze figure of the Roman soldier.

From England the bag-pipe spread to Caledonia and Ireland, where it took
root, identifying itself with the life of the people, as a military
instrument held in great esteem by the Celtic races. The bag-pipe was used
at weddings and funerals, and at all festivals; to lighten labour, during
the 18th century, as for instance in Skye, in 1786, when the inhabitants
were engaged in roadmaking, and each party of labourers had its bag-piper.
It was used in old mysteries at Coventry in 1534. Readers who wish to
follow closely the history of the bag-pipe in the British Isles should
consult Sir John Graham Dalyell's _Musical Memoirs of Scotland_ (London,
1849, with illustrative plates).

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Ancient Persian bag-pipe.

(From Sir Robert Porter's _Travels in Georgia, Persia,_ &c., vol. ii. p.
177, pl. lxiv.)]

On the downfall of the Roman empire, the bag-pipe, sharing the fate of
other instruments, probably lingered for a time among itinerant musicians,
actors, jugglers, &c., reappearing later in primitive guise with the stamp
of _naiveté_ which characterizes the productions of the early middle ages,
and with a new name, chorus (_q.v._). An illustration of a Persian bag-pipe
dating from the 6th century A.D. (reign of Chosroes II.) is to be found on
the great arch at Takht-i-Bostan (see fig. 2). This very crude
representation of the bag-pipe can only be useful as evidence that during
centuries which elapsed between the moulding of the figurine found in the
_tell_ at Susa, mentioned above, and the carving in the rock at
Takht-i-Bostan, the instrument had survived. The reign of Chosroes was
noted for its high standard of musical culture. The fault probably lies
with the draughtsman, who drew the sculptures on the arch for the book.
Nothing more is heard henceforth of the tibia utricularis. If the drawings
of the early medieval bag-pipes, which are by no means rare in MSS. and
monuments of the 9th to the 13th century, are to be trusted, it seems hard
to understand the _raison d'être_ of the instrument shorn of its drones, to
see how it justified its existence except as an ill-understood
reminiscence. What could be the object of laboriously inflating a bag for
the purpose of making a single chaunter speak, which could be done so much
more satisfactorily by taking the reed itself into the mouth, as was the
practice of the Greeks and Romans? There is a fine psalter in the library
of University Court, Glasgow,[36] belonging co the Hunterian collection, in
which King David is represented, as usual in the 12th century, playing or
rather tuning a harp, surrounded by musicians playing bells, rebec, guitar
fiddle (in 'cello position), quadruple pipes or ganistrum, and a bag-pipe
with long chaunter having a well-defined stock. The insufflation tube
appears to have been left out, and there are no drones to be seen.

There are interesting specimens of bag-pipes in Spanish illuminated MSS.
such as the magnificent volume of the _Cantigas di Santa Maria_, in the
Escurial, compiled for King Alphonso the Wise (13th century). There are
fifty-one separate figures of instrumentalists forming a kind of
introduction to the canticles, and among the instruments are three
bag-pipes, one of which is a remarkable instrument having no less than four
long drones and two chaunters which by an error of the draughtsmen are
represented as being blown from the piper's mouth. The fifty-one musicians
have been reproduced in black and white by Juan F. Riano[37] and also by
Don F. Aznar.[38] Another fine Spanish MS. in the British Museum, Add. MS.
18,851, of the end of the 15th century, illustrated by Flemish artists for
presentation to Queen Isabella, displays a profusion of musical instruments
in innumerable concert scenes; there are bag-pipes on f. 13,412^b and 419;
one of these has two drones, one conical, the other cylindrical, bound
together, and a curved chaunter.

The most trustworthy evidence we have of the medieval bag-pipe is the fine
Highland bag-pipe dated 1409, and belonging to Messrs J. & R. Glen,
described above. Edward Buhle[39] points out that from the 13th century the
bag-pipe became a court instrument played by minnesingers and troubadours,
as seen in literature and in the MSS. and monuments. It was about 1250 that
the human or animals' heads were used as stocks and as bells for the
chaunters. The opinion advanced that the bellows were first added to the
bag-pipe in Ireland seems untenable and is quite unsupported by facts; the
bellows were in all probability added to the union-pipes in imitation of
the musette. In the _Image of Ireland and Discoverie of Woodkarne_, by John
Derrick, 1581, the Irish insurgents are portrayed in pictures full of life
and character, as led to rebellion and pillage by a piper armed with a
bag-pipe, similar to the Highland bag-pipe. The cradle of the musette is
inconceivable anywhere but in France, among the courtiers and elegant
world, turning from the pomps and luxuries of court life to an artificial
admiration and cult of Nature, idealized to harmonize with silks and
satins. The cornemuse of shepherds and rustic swains became the fashionable
instrument, but as inflating the bag by the breath distorted the
performer's face, the bellows were substituted, and the whole instrument
was refined in appearance and tone-quality to fit it for its more exalted
position. The Hotteterre family and that of Chédeville were past masters of
the art of making the musette and of playing upon it; they counted among
their pupils the highest and noblest in the land. The cult of the musette
continued throughout the 17th and 18th centuries until the 'seventies, when
its popularity was on the wane and musettes figured largely in sales.[40]
Lully introduced the musette into his operas, and in 1758 the list of
instruments forming the orchestra at the Opéra includes one musette.[41]
Illustrations of bag-pipes are found in the miniatures of the following
MSS. in the British Museum.--2 B. VII. f. 192 and 197; Add. MS. 34,294 (the
_Sforza Book_), f. 62, vol. i.; Burney, 275, f. 715; Add. MS. 17,280, f.
238^b; Add. MS. 24,686 (_Tennyson Psalter_), f. 17^b; Add. MS. 17,280, f.
82^b; Add. MS. 24,681, f.44; Add. MS. 32,454; Add. MS. 11,867, f38; &c. &c.

(K. S.)

[1] See E. G. Graff, _Deutsche Interlinearversionen der Psalmen_ (from a
12th-cent. Windberg MS. at Munich), p. 384, Ps. lxxx. 2. "nemet den Sulmen
unde gebet den Suegdbalch."

[2] These harmonics may be obtained by good performers by what is known as
"pinching" or only partially covering the B and C holes and increasing the
wind pressure.

[3] The notes marked with asterisks are approximately a quarter of a tone
sharp.

[4] "Complete Tutor for attaining a thorough knowledge of the pipe music,"
prefixed to _A Collection of the Ancient Martial Music of Caledonia called
Piobaireachd, as performed on the Great Highland Bag-pipe_, Edinburgh, _c._
1805.

[5] Paper on "The Musical Scales of Various Nations," by Alex. J. Ellis,
F.R.S., _Jrnl. Soc. Arts_, 1885, vol. xxxiii. p. 499.

[6] _Tutor for the Highland Bag-pipe_, by David Glen (Edinburgh, 1899).

[7] _Tutor for the Highland Bag-pipe_, by Angus Mackay (Edinburgh, 1839).

[8] _A Collection of Ancient Piobaireachd or Highland Pipe Music_ by Angus
Mackay (Edinburgh, 1839), p. 128.

[9] _A Collection of Piobaireachd or Pipe Tunes as verbally taught by the
McCrummen Pipers on the Isle of Skye to their apprentices_, as taken from
John McCrummen (or Crimmon) by Niel MacLeod of Gesto, Skye (Edinburgh,
1880).

[10] Albyn's _Anthology_, vol. i. p. 90.

[11] _Descriptive Catalogue of the Musical Instruments exhibited at the
Royal Military Exhibition_, London, 1890, Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1891, pl.
ix. A, and description p. 57.

[12] _Ancient Laws of Ireland, Brehon Law Tracts_, published by the
Commissioners for publishing the Ancient Laws and Institutions of Ireland
(Dublin, 1879), vol. iv. pp. 338 and 339.

[13] John Derrick, _Image of Ireland and Discoverie of Woodkarne_ (London,
1581), pl. ii.

[14] _L'Harmonie universelle_, vol. ii. bk. v. pp. 282-287 and 305 (Paris,
1636-1637).

[15] _Syntagma Musicum_, part ii., _De Organographia_ (Wolfenbüttel, 1618);
republished in Band xiii. of the _Publicationen der Gesellschaft für
Musikforschung_ (Berlin, 1884), chap. xix. and pl. v., xi., xiii.

[16] See E. Thoinan, _Les Hotteterre et les Chèdeville, célèbres facteurs
de flûtes, hautbois, bassons et musettes_ (Paris, 1894), p. 23. It is
probable, however, that M. Thoinan, who makes this statement, has not
considered the possibility of the word _musette_ applying in this case to
the small rustic hautbois or _dessus de bombarde_, also written _muse_,
_muset_, _musele_, which occurs in many ballads of the 13th, 14th and 15th
centuries. See Fr. Godefroy, _Dictionnaire de l'ancienne langue française
du IX^e au XV^e siècle_ (Paris, 1888).

[17] Musettes de Poitou; probably the _cornemuses_ used in concert with the
Hautbois de Poitou.

[18] _Op. cit._ vol. ii. bk. v. pp. 287-292.

[19] See Ernest Thoinan, _op. cit._ pp. 15 et seq. (cf. Jules Ecorcheville,
"Quelques documents sur la musique de la Grande Écurie du Roi" in _Intern.
Mus. Ges._, Sammelband ii. 4, p. 625 and table 2, "Grands Hautbois").

[20] _Méthode pour la musette_, &c., by Hotteterre le Romain (Paris, 1737),
4to, chap. xvi.

[21] _Traité de la musette avec une nouvelle méthode_, &c. (Lyons, 1672),
pp. 25-27 and plate. A copy of this work is in the British Museum.

[22] _Op. cit_. bk. v. p. 293.

[23] Illustrated and described by Capt. C. R. Day, _Descriptive Catalogue_,
pl. ix. fig. C, p. 62.

[24] _L'Egypte au temps des Pharaons--la vie, la science et l'art; avec
Photogravures_, &c. (Paris, 1889) 12mo, p. 139.

[25] See _Délégation en Perse_, by J. de Morgan (Paris, 1900), vol. i. pl.
viii., Nos. 10 and 14.

[26] Dion Chrysostom, ed. Adolphus Emperius (Brunswick, 1844), p. 728 or
lxxi. (R) 381. See Pauly-Wissowa, _Realencyclopadie_, _s.v_. "Askaules."

[27] 54, B. Jowett's Eng. translation (Oxford, 1892).

[28] A suggestion the writer owes to Mr G. Barwick of the British Museum.

[29] See "Researches into the Origin of the Organs of the Ancients," by
Kathleen Schlesinger, Sammelband ii. _Intern. Musik. Ges_. vol. ii, 1901,
pp. 188-202.

[30] Suetonius, _Nero_, 54 (S. Clarke's translation and text).

[31] _Archaeologia_, vol. xvii. pp. 176-179 (London, 1814).

[32] _Inscriptiones antiquae totius orbis romani_ (Heidelberg, 1602-1603).

[33] _Miscell. erudit. antiquitatis_.

[34] _Munimenta antiqua_, vol. ii. (London, 1799), p. 22, pl. xx. fig. 3.

[35] See Montfaucon, _Suppl. de l'antiq. expliquée_, vol. iii. pl. lxxiii.,
Nos. 1 and 2, and explanation p. 189; Francesco Bianchini. _de tribus
generibus instr. mus. veterum_, Romae, 1742, pl. ii., Nos. 12 and 13, and
p. 11; Suetonius, _Vitae Neronis_, ed. Charles Patin, cap. 41, p. 304,
where the contorniate in question, whose musical instrument differs
essentially from Bianchini's and Montfaucon's, is figured.

[36] See Catalogue of the Exhibition of Illuminated MSS. at the Burlington
Fine Arts Club, 1908, No. 31.

[37] _Notes of Early Spanish Music_ (London, 1887), pp. 120 and 121.

[38] _Idumentario Española_ (Madrid, 1880).

[39] _Die musikalischen Instrumente in den Miniaturen des frühen
Mittelalters_, p. 50 (Leipzig, 1903).

[40] An interesting pamphlet by Eugène de Bricqueville, _Les Musettes_
(Paris, 1894), p. 36, with illustrations.

[41] See Antoine Vidal, _Les Instruments à archet_ (Paris, 1871), vol. i.
p. 81, note 1.