BAGOAS, a Persian name (_Bagoi_), a shortened form of names like Bagadata,
"given by God," often used for eunuchs. The best-known of these ("Bagoses"
in Josephus) became the confidential minister of Artaxerxes III. He threw
in his lot with the Rhodian condottiere Mentor, and with his help succeeded
in subjecting Egypt again to the Persian empire (probably 342 B.C.). Mentor
became general of the maritime provinces, suppressed the rebels, and sent
Greek mercenaries to the king, while Bagoas administered the upper
satrapies and gained such power that he was the real master of the kingdom
(Diod. xvi. 50; cf. Didymus, _Comm. in Demosth. Phil._ vi. 5). He became
very wealthy by confiscating the sacred writings of the Egyptian temples
and giving them back to the priests for large bribes (Diod. xvi. 51). When
the high priest of Jerusalem, Jesus, murdered his brother Johannes in the
temple, Bagoas (who had supported Johannes) put a new tax on the Jews and
entered the temple, saying that he was purer than the murderer who
performed the priestly office (Joseph. _Ant._ xi. 7.1). In 338 Bagoas
killed the king and all his sons but the youngest, Arses (_q.v._), whom he
raised to the throne; two years later he murdered Arses and made Darius
III. king. When Darius attempted to become independent of the powerful
vizier ([Greek: chiliarchos]), Bagoas tried to poison him too; but Darius
was warned and forced him to drink the poison himself (Diod. xvii. 5;
Johann. Antioch, p. 38, 39 ed. Müller; Arrian ii. 14. 5; Curt. vi. 4. 10).
A later story, that Bagoas was an Egyptian and killed Artaxerxes III.
because he had killed the sacred Apis (Aelian, _Var. Hist._ vi. 8), is
without historical value. Bagoas' house in Susa, with rich treasures, was
presented by Alexander to Parmenio (Plut. _Alex._ 39); his gardens in
Babylon, with the best species of palms, are mentioned by Theophrastus
(_Hist. Plant_, ii. 6; Plin. _Nat. Hist._ xiii. 41). Another eunuch,
Bagoas, was a favourite of Alexander the Great (Dicaearchus in Athen. xiii.
603b; Plut. _Al._ 67; Aelian, _Var. Hist._ 3. 23; Curt. vi. 5. 23; x. 1. 25
ff.).

(ED. M.)