BAGRATION, PETER, PRINCE (1765-1812), Russian general descended from the
noble Georgian family of the Bagratides was born in 1765. He entered the
Russian army in 1782, and served for some years in the Caucasus. He was
engaged in the siege of Ochakov (1788), and in the Polish campaign of 1794,
being present at the taking of Praga and Warsaw. His merits were recognized
by Suvarov, whom he accompanied in the Italian and Swiss campaign of 1799,
winning particular distinction by the capture of the town of Brescia. In
the wars of 1805 his achievements were even more brilliant. With a small
rearguard he successfully resisted the repeated attacks of forces five
times his own numbers (Hollabrünn), and though half his men fell, the
retreat of the main army under Kutusov was thereby secured. At Austerlitz
he was engaged against the left wing of the French army, under Murat and
Lannes, and at Eylau, Heilsberg and Friedland he fought with the most
resolute and stubborn courage. In 1808 by a daring march across the frozen
Gulf of Finland he captured the Åland Islands, and in 1809 he commanded
against the Turks at the battles of Rassowa and Tataritza. In 1812 he [v.03
p.0207] commanded the 2nd army of the West, and though defeated at Mogilev
(23rd July), rejoined the main army under Barclay, and led the left wing at
Borodino (7th Sept.), where he received a mortal wound. A monument was
erected in his honour by the tsar Nicholas I. on the battlefield of
Borodino.