BAHIA BLANCA, a city and port of Argentina, on the Naposta river, 3 m. from
its outlet into a deep, well-sheltered bay of the same name. Pop. (est.
1903) 11,600. It is situated in the extreme southern part of the province
of Buenos Aires and is 447 m. by rail S.W. of the national capital. The
opening to settlement of the national territories of La Pampa and Neuquén
has contributed largely to the growth and importance of Bahia Blanca. It is
the natural shipping-port for these territories and for the southern
districts of the province of Buenos Aires, from which great quantities of
wheat and wool are exported. The bay has long been recognized as one of the
best on the Argentine coast, and when the channel is properly dredged, will
admit steamers of 30 ft. draught at low-water. The Argentine government has
located its principal naval station here, at the [v.03 p.0211] Puerto
Militar, between the city and the entrance to the bay. The port, whose
trade is increasing rapidly, is connected with the neighbouring and
interior producing districts by five or six lines of railway and their
branches. Bahia Blanca dates from 1828, when a fort and trading post were
located here, but its development as a commercial centre began only in
1885, when its first railway line was opened. In 1908 direct railway
communication was opened with Mendoza and San Juan. Though situated near
the mountainous section of southern Buenos Aires, the immediate vicinity of
the city is low and swampy, its water is brackish, and it has been
decidedly unhealthy; but a water supply from the Sauce Grande, 50 m.
distant, was projected in 1906, and this, with better drainage and street
paving, was expected to improve matters. The mean annual temperature is
60°, and the average annual rainfall is 19 in. The city has street cars,
electric-lights and telephone service, and the port has a shipping pier
1640 ft. long, with spacious warehouses and several miles of railway
sidings.