BAILLET, ADRIEN (1649-1706), French scholar and critic, was born on the
13th of June 1649, at the village of Neuville near Beauvais, in Picardy.
His parents could only afford to send him to a small school in the village,
but he picked up some Latin from the friars of a neighbouring convent, who
brought him under the notice of the bishop of Beauvais. By his kindness
Baillet received a thorough education at the theological seminary, and was
afterwards appointed to a post as teacher in the college of Beauvais. In
1676 he was ordained priest and was presented to a small vicarage. He
accepted in 1680 the appointment of librarian to M. de Lamoignon,
advocate-general to the _parlement_ of Paris, of whose library he made a
_catalogue raisonné_ (35 vols.), all written with his own hand. The
remainder of his life was spent in incessant, unremitting labour; so keen
was his devotion to study that he allowed himself only five hours a day for
rest. He died on the 21st of January 1706. Of his numerous works the
following are the most conspicuous: (1) _Histoire de Hollande depuis la
trève de 1609 jusqu'à 1690_ (4 vols. 1693), a continuation of Grotius, and
published under the name of La Neuville, (2) _Les Vies des saints ..._ (4
vols. 1701), (3) _Des Satires personelles, traité historique et critique de
celles qui portent le titre d' Anti_ (2 vols. 1689), (4) _Vie de Descartes_
(2 vols. 1691), (5) _Auteurs déguisés sous des noms étrangers, empruntés,
&c._ (1690), (6) _Jugemens des savans sur les principaux ouvrages des
auteurs_ (9 vols. 1685-1686). The last is the most celebrated and useful of
all his works. At the time of his death he was engaged on a _Dictionnaire
universelle ecclésiastique_. The praise bestowed on the Jansenists in the
_Jugemens des savans_ brought down on Baillet the hatred of the Jesuits,
and his _Vie des saints_, in which he brought his critical mind to bear on
the question of miracles, caused some scandal. His _Vie de Descartes_ is a
mine of information on the philosopher and his work, derived from numerous
unimpeachable authorities.

See the edition by M. de la Monnoye of the _Jugemens des savans_
(Amsterdam, 4 vols. 1725), which contains the _Anti-Baillet_ of Gilles
Ménage and an _Abrégé de la vie de Mr Baillet_.