BAILEY, GAMALIEL (1807-1859), American journalist, was born at Mount Holly,
New Jersey, on the 3rd of December 1807. He graduated at the Jefferson
Medical College in Philadelphia in 1827. After editing for a short time a
religious journal, the _Methodist Protestant_, at Baltimore, he removed in
1831 to Cincinnati, Ohio, where at first he devoted himself almost
exclusively to the practice of medicine. He was also a lecturer on
physiology at the Lane Theological Seminary, and at the time of the Lane
Seminary debates (February 1834) between the pro-slavery and the
anti-slavery students, and the subsequent withdrawal of the latter, he
became an ardent abolitionist. In 1836 he joined James G. Birney in the
editorial control of the _Philanthropist_; in the following year he
succeeded Birney as editor, and conducted the paper in spite of threats and
acts of violence--the printing-office being thrice wrecked by a mob--until
1847. From 1843 also he edited a daily paper, the _Herald_. In 1847 he
assumed control of the new abolitional organ, the _National Era_, at
Washington, D.C. Here also his paper was the object of attack by
pro-slavery mobs, at one time in 1848 the editor and printers being
besieged in their office for three days. This paper had a considerable
circulation, and in it, in 1851-1852, Mrs. H. B. Stowe's _Uncle Tom's
Cabin_ was first published. Bailey died at sea in the course of a trip to
Europe on the 5th of June 1859.