BAILLIE, LADY GRIZEL (1665-1746), Scottish song-writer, eldest daughter of
Sir Patrick Hume or Home of Polwarth, afterwards earl of Marchmont, was
born at Redbraes Castle, Berwickshire, on the 25th of December 1665. When
she was twelve years old she carried letters from her father to the
Scottish patriot, Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, who was then in prison.
Home's friendship for Baillie made him a suspected man, and the king's
troops occupied Redbraes Castle. He remained in hiding for some time in a
churchyard, where his daughter kept him supplied with food, but on hearing
of the execution of Baillie (1684) he fled to Holland, where his family
soon after joined him. They returned to Scotland at the Revolution. Lady
Grizel married in 1692 George Baillie, son of the patriot. She died on the
6th of December 1746. She had two daughters, Grizel, who married Sir
Alexander Murray of Stanhope, and Rachel, Lady Binning. Lady Murray had in
her possession a MS. of her mother's in prose and verse. Some of the songs
had been printed in Allan Ramsay's _Tea-Table Miscellany_. "And werena my
heart light I wad dee," the most famous of Lady Grizel's songs, originally
appeared in _Orpheus Caledonius_ (1725).

_Memoirs of the Lives and Characters of the Right Hon. George Baillie of
Jerviswood and Lady Grisell Baillie, by their daughter, Lady Murray of
Stanhope_, were printed in 1822. George Baillie's _Correspondence_
(1702-1708) was edited by Lord Minto for the Bannatyne Club in 1842. "The
Legend of Lady Grizelda Baillie" forms one of Joanna Baillie's _Metrical
Legends of Exalted Character_.