BAILEY, PHILIP JAMES (1816-1902), English poet, author of _Festus_, was
born at Nottingham on the 22nd of April 1816. His father, who himself
published both prose and verse, owned and edited from 1845 to 1852 the
_Nottingham Mercury_, one of the chief journals in his native town. Philip
James Bailey received a local education until his sixteenth year, when he
matriculated at Glasgow University. He did not, however, take his degree,
but moved in 1835 to London and entered Lincoln's Inn. Without making
serious practice of the law he settled at Basford, and for three years was
occupied with the composition of _Festus_, which appeared anonymously in
1839. Its success, both in England and America, was immediate. It passed
through a dozen editions in the country of its birth, and nearly three
times as many in the United States; and when in 1889 its author was able to
publish a "Jubilee Edition," he could feel that it was one of the few poems
of its time which was known to both the older and the younger generations.
Its author is known almost exclusively by his one voluminous poem, for
though Bailey published other verses he is essentially a man of one book.
_Festus_ has undergone many changes and incorporations, but it remains a
singular example of a piece of work virtually completed in youth, and never
supplanted or reinforced by later achievements of its author. It is a vast
pageant of theology and philosophy, comprising in some twelve divisions an
attempt to represent the relation of God to man and of man to God, to
emphasize the benignity of Providence, to preach the immortality of the
soul, and to postulate "a gospel of faith and reason combined." It contains
fine lines and dignified thought, but its ambitious theme, and a certain
incoherency in the manner in which it is worked out, prevent it from being
easily readable by any but the most sympathetic student. Bailey died on the
6th of September 1902.