BAILMENT (from Fr. _bailler_, to place in charge of, cf. BAIL), in law, a
delivery of goods from one person called the _bailor_, to another person
called the _bailee_, for some purpose, upon a contract, express or implied,
that after the purpose has been fulfilled they shall be redelivered to the
bailor, or otherwise dealt with according to his direction, or kept till he
reclaims them. The following is Chief Justice Holt's classification of
bailments in _Coggs_ v. _Bernard_, 1704, 1 Sm. L.C. 167, which is generally
adopted. (1) _Depositum_, or bailment without reward, in order that the
bailee may keep the goods for the bailor. In this case, the bailee has no
right to use the thing entrusted to him, and is liable for gross
negligence, but not for ordinary negligence. Thus, where a customer had
deposited some securities with his banker (who received nothing for his
services) and they were stolen by a cashier, it was held that as there was
no proof of gross negligence the banker was not liable (_Giblin_ v.
_McMullen_, 1868, L.R. 2 P.C. 317). (2) _Commodatum_, or loan, where goods
or chattels that are useful are lent to the bailee _gratis_, to be used by
him. The bailee may be justly considered as representing himself to the
bailor to be a person of competent skill to take care of the thing lent
(_Wilson_ v. _Brett_, 1843, 11 M. & W. 113), and the transaction being a
gratuitous loan, and one for the advantage of the bailee solely, he is
bound to use great diligence in the protection of the thing bailed and will
be responsible even for slight negligence. Thus, where a [v.03 p.0221]
horse was lent to the defendant to ride, it was held that it did not
warrant him in allowing his servant to do so (_Bringloe_ v. _Morrice_,
1676, 1 Mod. 210). But where a horse was for sale and the vendor allowed
the defendant to have the horse for the purpose of trying it, it was held
that he had a right to allow a competent person upon the horse to try it
(_Camoys_ v. _Scurr_, 1840, 9 C. & P. 383). (3) _Locatio rei_, or lending
for hire. In the case of hiring the bailee is bound to use such diligence
as a prudent man would exercise towards his own property. Thus, where the
defendant hired a horse, and it having fallen ill, prescribed for it
himself instead of calling in a veterinary surgeon, he was held liable for
the loss (_Dean_ v. _Keate_, 1811, 3 Camp. 4). (4) _Vadium_, pawn or
pledge; a bailment of personal property as a security for a debt. In this
case the pledgee is bound to use ordinary diligence in guarding the thing
pledged. (5) _Locatio operis faciendi_, where goods are delivered to be
carried, or something is to be done about them for a reward to be paid to
the bailee. In this case, the bailee is bound to use ordinary diligence in
preserving the property entrusted to him. (6) _Mandatum_, a delivery of
goods to somebody, who is to carry them, or do something about them
_gratis_. The liabilities of a mandatory and of a depository are exactly
the same; neither is liable for anything short of gross negligence.

See further under BANKS AND BANKING; CARRIER; DILIGENCE; FACTOR; HIRING;
INNS AND INNKEEPERS; LIEN; NEGLIGENCE; PLEDGE; PAWNBROKING; PRINCIPAL AND
AGENT, &c.