BAILY, FRANCIS (1774-1844), English astronomer, was born at Newbury in
Berkshire, on the 28th of April 1774. After a tour in the unsettled parts
of North America in 1796-1797, his journal of which was edited by Augustus
de Morgan in 1856, he entered the London Stock Exchange in 1799. The
successive publication of _Tables for the Purchasing and Renewing of
Leases_ (1802), of _The Doctrine of Interest and Annuities_ (1808), and
_The Doctrine of Life-Annuities and Assurances_ (1810), earned him a high
reputation as a writer on life-contingencies; he amassed a fortune through
diligence and integrity and retired from business in 1825, to devote
himself wholly to astronomy. He had already, in 1820, taken a leading part
in the foundation of the Royal Astronomical Society; and its gold medal was
awarded him, in 1827, for his preparation of the Astronomical Society's
Catalogue of 2881 stars (_Memoirs R. Astr. Soc._ ii.). The reform of the
_Nautical Almanac_ in 1829 was set on foot by his protests; he recommended
to the British Association in 1837, and in great part executed, the
reduction of Joseph de Lalande's and Nicolas de Lacaille's catalogues
containing about 57,000 stars; he superintended the compilation of the
British Association's Catalogue of 8377 stars (published 1845); and revised
the catalogues of Tobias Mayer, Ptolemy, Ulugh Beg, Tycho Brahe, Edmund
Halley and Hevelius (_Memoirs R. Astr. Soc._ iv., xiii).

His notice of "Baily's Beads," during an annular eclipse of the sun on the
15th of May 1836, at Inch Bonney in Roxburghshire, started the modern
series of eclipse-expeditions. The phenomenon, which depends upon the
inequalities of the moon's limb, was so vividly described by him as to
attract an unprecedented amount of attention to the totality of the 8th of
July 1842, observed by Baily himself at Pavia. He completed and discussed
H. Foster's pendulum-experiments, deducing from them an ellipticity for the
earth of 1/289 (_Memoirs R. Astr. Soc._ vii.); corrected for the length of
the seconds-pendulum by introducing a neglected element of reduction; and
was entrusted, in 1843, with the reconstruction of the standards of length.
His laborious operations for determining the mean density of the earth,
carried on by Henry Cavendish's method (1838-1842), yielded for it the
authoritative value of 5.66. He died in London, on the 30th of August 1844.
Baily's _Account of the Rev. John Flamsteed_ (1835) is of fundamental
importance to the scientific history of that time. It included a
republication of the British Catalogue.

See J. Herschel's _Memoir of F. Baily, Esq._ (1845), also prefixed to
Baily's _Journal of a Tour_, with a list of his writings; _Month. Not. R.
Astr. Soc._ xiv. 1844.