BAILEY, SAMUEL (1791-1870), British philosopher and author, was born at
Sheffield in 1791. He was among the first of those Sheffield merchants who
went to the United States to establish trade connexions. After a few years
in his father's business, he retired with an ample fortune from all
business concerns, with the exception of the Sheffield Banking Company, of
which he was chairman for many years. Although an ardent liberal, he took
little part in political affairs. On two occasions he stood for Sheffield
as a "philosophic radical," but without success. His life is for the most
part a history of his numerous and varied publications. His books, if not
of first-rate importance, are marked by lucidity, elegance of style and
originality of treatment. He died suddenly on the 18th of January 1870,
leaving over £80,000 to the town of Sheffield. His first work, _Essays on
the Formation and Publication of Opinions_, published anonymously in 1821
(2nd ed., 1826; 3rd ed., 1837), attracted more attention than any of his
other writings. A sequel to it appeared in 1829, _Essays on the Pursuit of
Truth_ (2nd ed., 1844). Between these two were _Questions in Political
Economy_, _Politics, Morals, &c._ (1823), and a _Critical Dissertation on
the Nature, Measure, and Causes of Value_ (1825), directed against the
opinions of Ricardo and his school. His next publications also were on
economic or political subjects, _Rationale of Political Representation_
(1835), and _Money and its Vicissitudes_ (1837), now practically forgotten;
about the same time also appeared some of his pamphlets, _Discussion of
Parliamentary Reform_, _Right of Primogeniture Examined_, _Defence of
Joint-Stock Banks_. In 1842 appeared his Review of _Berkeley's Theory of
Vision_, an able work, which called forth rejoinders from J. S. Mill in the
_Westminster Review_ (reprinted in _Dissertations_), and from Ferrier in
_Blackwood_ (reprinted in _Lectures and Remains_, ii). Bailey replied to
his critics in a _Letter to a Philosopher _ (1843), &c. In 1851 he
published _Theory of Reasoning _ (2nd ed., 1852), a discussion of the
nature of inference, and an able criticism of the functions and value of
the syllogism. In 1852 he published _Discourses on Various Subjects_; and
finally summed up his philosophic views in the _Letters on the Philosophy
of the Human Mind_ (three series, 1855, 1858, 1863). In 1845 he published
_Maro_, a poem in four cantoes (85 pp., Longmans), containing a description
of a young poet who printed 1000 copies of his first poem, of which only 10
were sold. He was a diligent student of Shakespeare, and his last literary
work was _On the Received Text of Shakespeare's Dramatic Writings and its
Improvement_ (1862). Many of the emendations suggested are more fantastic
than felicitous.

The _Letters_ contain a discussion of many of the principal problems in
psychology and ethics. Bailey can hardly be classed as belonging either to
the strictly empirical or to the idealist school, but his general tendency
is towards the former. (1) In regard to method, he founds psychology
entirely on introspection. He thus, to a certain extent, agrees with the
Scottish school, but he differs from them in rejecting altogether the
doctrine of mental faculties. What have been designated faculties are, upon
his view, merely classified [v.03 p.0218] facts or phenomena of
consciousness. He criticizes very severely the habitual use of metaphorical
language in describing mental operations. (2) His doctrine of perception,
which is, in brief, that "the perception of external things through the
organs of sense is a direct mental act or phenomenon of consciousness not
susceptible of being resolved into anything else," and the reality of which
can be neither proved nor disproved, is not worked out in detail, but is
supported by elaborate and sometimes subtle criticisms of all other
theories. (3) With regard to general and abstract ideas and general
propositions, his opinions are those of the empirical school, but his
analysis frequently puts the matter in a new light. (4) In the theory of
morals, Bailey is an advocate of utilitarianism (though he objects to the
term "utility" as being narrow and, to the unthinking, of sordid content),
and works out with great skill the steps in the formation of the "complex"
mental facts involved in the recognition of duty, obligation, right. He
bases all moral phenomena on five facts:--(1) Man is susceptible to
pleasure (and pain); (2) he likes (or dislikes) their causes; (3) he
desires to reciprocate pleasure and pain received; (4) he expects such
reciprocation from others; (5) he feels more or less sympathy with the same
feelings in his fellows (_Letters_, 3rd series).

See A. Bain's _Moral Science_; Th. Ribot, _La Psychologie anglaise
contemp._; J. F. Ferrier, _Philos. Remains_ (Edinb. and Lond., 1875), pp.
351-381.