BAIRAM, a Perso-Turkish word meaning "festival," applied in Turkish to the
two principal festivals of Islam. The first of these, according to the
calendar, is the "Lesser Festival," called by the Turks _Kütshük Bair[=a]m_
("Lesser Bairam"), or _Sheker Bair[=a]m_ ("Sugar Bairam"), and by
Arabic-speaking Moslems _`[=I]d al-Fitr_ ("Festival of Fast-breaking"), or
_Al-`[=i]d a[s.]-[s.]agh[=i]r_ ("Lesser Festival"). It follows immediately
the ninth or the fasting-month, Rama[d.][=a]n, occupying the first three
days of the tenth month, Shaww[=a]l. It is, therefore, also called by Turks
_Ramaz[=a]n Bair[=a]m_, and exhibits more outward signs of rejoicing than
the technically "Greater Festival." Official receptions are held on it, and
private visits paid; friends congratulate one another, and presents are
given; new clothes [v.03 p.0224] are put on, and the graves of relatives
are visited. The second, or "Greater Festival," is called by the Turks
_Qurb[=a]n Bair[=a]m_, "Sacrifice Bairam," and by Arabic speakers
_Al-`[=i]d al-kab[=i]r_, "Greater Festival," or _`[=I][d.]
al-a[d.][h.][=a]_, "Festival of Sacrifice." It falls on the tenth, and two
or three following days, of the last month, _Dh[=u]-l-[h.]ijja_, when the
pilgrims each slay a ram, a he-goat, a cow or a camel in the valley of Mina
in commemoration of the ransom of Ishmael with a ram. Similarly throughout
the Moslem world, all who can afford it sacrifice at this time a legal
animal, and either consume the flesh themselves or give it to the poor.
Otherwise it is celebrated like the "Lesser Festival," but with less
ardour. Both festivals, of course, belong to a lunar calendar, and move
through the solar year every thirty-two years.

See Lane's _Modern Egyptians_, chap. xxv.; Michell, _Egyptian Calendar_;
Hughes, _Dictionary of Islam_, pp. 192 ff.; Sir R. Burton, _Pilgrimage_,
chaps. vii., xxx.

(D. B. MA.)