BAITER, JOHANN GEORG (1801-1877), Swiss philologist and textual critic, was
born at Zürich on the 31st of May 1801. Having received his early education
in his native place, he went (1818) to the university of Tübingen, but from
want of funds was obliged to return to Zürich, where for several years he
was a private tutor. From 1824 to 1829 he studied at Munich under Friedrich
Thiersch; at Göttingen, under Georg Dissen; at Königsberg, under Christian
Lobeck. From 1833 to 1876 he was _Oberlehrer_ at the gymnasium in Zürich,
where he died on the 10th of October 1877. Baiter's strong point was
textual criticism, applied chiefly to Cicero and the Attic orators; he was
very successful in hunting up the best MS. authorities, and his collations
were made with the greatest accuracy. Most of his works were produced in
collaboration with other scholars, such as Orelli, who regarded him as his
right-hand man. He edited Isocrates, _Panegyricus_ (1831); with Sauppe,
Lycurgus, _Leocratea_ (1834) and _Oratores Attici_ (1838-1850); with Orelli
and Winckelmann, a critical edition of Plato (1839-1842), which marked a
distinct advance in the text, two new MSS. being laid under contribution;
with Orelli, Babrius, _Fabellae Iambicae nuper repertae_ (1845); Isocrates,
in the Didot collection of classics (1846). He had for some time been
associated with Orelli in his great work on Cicero, and assisted in
_Ciceronis Scholiastae_ (1833) and _Onomasticon Tullianum_ (1836-1838). For
the _Fasti Consulares_ and _Triumphales_ he was alone responsible. With
Orelli and (after his death) Halm, he assisted in the second edition of the
Cicero, and, with Kayser, edited the same author for the Tauchnitz series
(1860-1869). New editions of Orelli's Tacitus and Horace were also due to
him. It is worth noting that, with Sauppe, he translated Leake's
_Topography of Athens_.