BAIUS, or DE BAY, MICHAEL (1513-1589), Belgian theologian, was born at
Melun in Hainault in 1513. Educated at Louvain University, he studied
philosophy and theology with distinguished success, and was rewarded by a
series of academic appointments. In 1552 Charles V. appointed him professor
of scriptural interpretation in the university. In 1563 he was nominated
one of the Belgian representatives at the council of Trent, but arrived too
late to take an important part in its deliberations. At Louvain, however,
he obtained a great name as a leader in the anti-scholastic reaction of the
16th century. The champions of this reaction fought under the banner of St
Augustine; and Baius' Augustinian predilections brought him into conflict
with Rome on questions of grace, free-will and the like. In 1567 Pius V.
condemned seventy-nine propositions from his writings in the Bull _Ex
omnibus afflictionibus_. To this Baius submitted; though certain indiscreet
utterances on the part of himself and his supporters led to a renewal of
the condemnation in 1579 by Gregory XIII. Baius, however, was not disturbed
in the tenure of his professorship, and even became chancellor of Louvain
in 1575. He died, still in the enjoyment of these two dignities, in 1589.
Baius is chiefly interesting as a forerunner of the more celebrated
Cornelius Jansen (see JANSEN). His writings are described by Harnack as a
curious mixture of Catholic orthodoxy and unconscious tendencies to
Protestantism; their most noticeable point is the great importance they
attach to the fact of sin, both original and actual.

His principal works were published in a collected form at Cologne, 1696, 1
vol. 4to, in two parts; some large treatises have not been published. There
is an excellent study of both books and author by Linsenmann, _Michael
Baius, und die Grundlegung des Jansenismus_, published at Tübingen in 1867.