BAJOCIAN, in geology, the name proposed in 1849 by d'Orbigny for the rocks
of Middle Jurassic age which are well developed in the neighbourhood of
Bayeux, Calvados. The Bajocian stage is practically equivalent to the
Inferior Oolite of British geologists. It corresponds fairly closely with
the Lower and Middle Brown Jura of Quenstedt, and with the Dogger of Oppel.
By means of the fossil ammonites the Bajocia strata have been subdivided
into the following zones, in descending order:--

  Zone of _Parkinsonia Parkinsoni_ and _Cosmoceras garantianum_
    "     _Coeloceras subcoronatum_ (_Humphriesianum_)
    "     _Sonninia Romani_
    "     _Stephaeoceras Sowerbyi_
    "     _Harpoceras concavum_
    "             "     _Murchisonae_ \ Substage Aalénien
    "             "     _opalinum_    / of Mayer-Eymar.

It should be remarked that some European geologists prefer [v.03 p.0226] to
include the _Parkinsonia_ zone in the base of the overlying Bathonian
(_q.v._).

The Bajocian rocks of Europe are mostly limestones of various kinds, very
frequently oolitic. At Bayeux, the type district, they are ferruginous
oolites; in the Jura and Lorraine a coral limestone overlies a crinoidal
variety; calcareous sandy and marly beds occur in Maine and Anjou; in
Poitou the limestone is dolomitic and bears nodules of chert. Rocks of the
same age, as recognized by their fossil contents, have a wide range; they
are found in north Africa, Goa, Somaliland, German East Africa, and
north-west Madagascar; through southern Europe they may be followed into
Turkestan, and the Kota-Maleri beds of the Upper Gondwana series of India
may possibly belong to this stage. In South America they appear in Bolivia,
Chile and Argentina; in North America, in British Columbia, Dakota, Mexico,
Oregon and California. The Bajocian sea also included parts of New South
Wales, New Zealand (Flag Hills beds?), Borneo and Japan, and it extended
into the polar region of eastern Greenland and Franz Josef Land.

In addition to the ammonites already mentioned, the large belemnites
(_Megateuthis giganteus_) and terebratulas (_T. perovalis_) are worthy of
notice; crinoids and corals were abundant, and so also were certain forms
of _Trigonia_ (_T. costata_), _Pleurotomaria_ and _Cidaris_.

See JURASSIC; also A. de Lapparent, _Traité de géologie_, vol. ii. (5th
ed., 1906); and H. B. Woodward, "The Jurassic Rocks of Britain," vol. iv.,
1894 (_Mem. Geol. Survey_); both works contain references to original
papers.

(J. A. H.)