BAKALAI (BAKALÉ, BANGOUENS), a Bantu negroid tribe inhabiting a wide tract
of French Congo between the river Ogowé and 2° S. They appear to be
immigrants from the south-east, and have been supposed to be connected
racially with the Galoa, one of the Mpongwe tribes and the chief
river-people of the Ogowé. The Bakalai have suffered much from the
incursions of their neighbours the Fang, also arrivals from the south-east,
and it may be that they migrated to their present abode under pressure from
this people at an earlier date. They are keen hunters and were traders in
slaves and rubber; the slave traffic has been prohibited by the French
authorities. Their women display considerable ingenuity in dressing their
hair, often taking a whole day to arrange a coiffure; the hair is built up
on a substructure of clay and a good deal of false hair incorporated; a
coat of red, green or yellow pigment often completes the effect. The same
colours are used to decorate the hut doors. The villages, some of which are
fortified with palisades, are usually very dirty; chiefs and rich men own
plantations which are situated at some distance from the village and to
which their womenfolk are sent in times of war. The Bakalai of Lake Isanga
cremate their dead; those of the Upper Ogowé throw the bodies into the
river, with the exception of those killed in war. The body of a chief is
placed secretly in a hut erected in the depths of the forest, and the
village is deserted for that night, in some cases altogether; the slaves of
the deceased are (or were) sacrificed, and his wives scourged and secluded
in huts for a week. "Natural" deaths are attributed to the machinations of
a sorcerer, and the poison-ordeal is often practised. Of their social
organization little is known, but it appears that nearly all individuals
refrain from eating the flesh of some particular animal.