BAKEWELL, a market-town in the western parliamentary division of
Derbyshire, England, on the river Wye, 25 m. N.N.W. of Derby, on the
Midland railway. Pop. of urban district (1901) 2850. The church of All
Saints is mentioned in Domesday, and tradition ascribes the building of its
nave to King John, while the western side of the tower must be older still.
Within are some admirable specimens of encaustic tiles, and several
monuments of the Vernon and Manners families; while an ancient runic
rood-stone stands in the churchyard. Zinc and marble are worked in the
neighbourhood. The cotton manufacture was established in the town by Sir
Richard Arkwright. Bakewell is noted for a chalybeate spring, of use in
cases of chronic rheumatism, and there are baths attached to it. A kind of
jam-cake, called a "Bakewell pudding," gives another sort of fame to the
place. The almshouses, known as St John's hospital, were founded in 1602;
and in 1637 a free grammar school was endowed by Lady Grace Manners. Among
modern buildings may be mentioned the Bakewell and High Peak Institute, and
the town hall and museum. On Castle Hill, in the vicinity, are the remains
of an earthwork, said to have been raised by Edward the Elder in 924.
Within the parish are included the mansions of Burton Closes and Castle
Hill. Two miles from the town, amidst beautiful gardens and meadows, is
Haddon Hall. To the east lies the magnificent domain of Chatsworth. The
scenery of the neighbourhood, in both the Wye and the Derwent valleys, is
very beautiful; the village of Eyam (pronounced Eem) near the Derwent may
be noticed as specially picturesque. The plague of 1665, carried hither
from London, almost depopulated this village, and the name of the rector,
William Mompesson, attracted wide notice on account of his brave attempts
to combat the outbreak.