BAKU, a government of Russian Transcaucasia, stretching along the west
coast of the Caspian Sea from 41° 50' to 38° 30' N. lat., and bounded on
the W. by the government of Elisavetpol and the province of Daghestan, and
on the S. by Persia. It includes the Kuba plain on the north-east slope of
the Caucasus; the eastern extremity of that range from the Shad-dagh
(13,960 ft.) and the Bazardyuz (14,727 ft.) to the Caspian, where it
terminates in the Apsheron peninsula; the steppes of the lower Kura and
Aras on the south of the Caucasus, and a narrow coast-belt between the
Anti-Caucasus and the Caspian. The last-mentioned region lies partly round
the Kizil-agach Bay, opening to the south. Area of government, 15,172 sq.
m. Both slopes of the Caucasus are very fertile and well irrigated, with
fine forests, fields of rice and other cereals, and flourishing gardens.
The steppes of the Kura are also fertile, but require artificial
irrigation, especially for cotton. In addition to agriculture and
cattle-breeding, the vine and mulberry are extensively grown. The Apsheron
peninsula is dry and bare of vegetation; but within it are situated the
famous petroleum wells of Baku. These, which go down to depths of 700 to
1700 ft., yield crude naphtha, from which the petroleum or kerosene is
distilled; while the heavier residue (_mazut_) is used as lubricating oil
and for fuel, for instance in the locomotives of the Transcaspian railway.
Whereas in 1863 the output was only 5500 tons of crude naphtha, in 1904 it
amounted to 9,833,600 tons; but business was much injured by a serious fire
in 1905. The oil-fields lie around the town of Baku: the largest, that of
Balakhany-Sabunchi-Romany (6 sq. m.), is 8½ m. north of the town; that of
Bibi-Eybat, is 3½ m. south; the "black town" (Nobel's) is 2 m. south-east;
and beyond the last names is the "white town" (Rothschild's). The lighter
oil is conveyed to Batum on the Black Sea in pipes, and is there shipped
for export; the heavier oils reach the same port and the ports of
Novorossiysk and Poti, also on the Black Sea, in tank railway-cars. At
Surakhani, 13 m. east of the town, is the now disused temple of the Parsee
fire-worshippers, who were attracted thither by the natural fountains of
inflammable gas.

The government is divided into six districts, the chief towns of which are
Baku (the capital of the government), Geok-chai (pop. 2247 in 1897), Kuba
(15,346), Lenkoran (8768), Salyany (10,168), in district of Jevat, and
Shemakha (20,008). The population numbered 828,511 in 1897, of whom the
major part were Tatars; other races were Russians, the Iranian tribes of
the Tates (89,519) and Talysh (34,994), Armenians (52,233) and the
Caucasian mountaineers known as Kurins.