BALBI, ADRIAN (1782-1848), Italian geographer, was born at Venice on the
25th of April 1782. The publication of his _Prospetto politico-geografico
dello stato attuale del globo_ (Venice, [v.03 p.0241] 1808) obtained his
election to the chair of professor of geography at the college of San
Michele at Murano; in 1811-1813 he was professor of physics at the Lyceum
of Fermo, and afterwards became attached to the customs office at his
native city. In 1820 he visited Portugal, and there collected materials for
his _Essai statistique sur le royaume de Portugal et d'Algarve_, published
in 1822 at Paris, where the author resided from 1821 until 1832. This was
followed by _Variétés politiques et statistiques de la monarchie
portugaise_, which contains some curious observations respecting that
country under the Roman sway. In 1826 he published the first volume of his
_Atlas ethnographique du globe, ou classification des peuples anciens et
modernes d'après leurs langues_, a work of great erudition. In 1832
appeared the _Abrégé de Géographie_, which, in an enlarged form, was
translated into the principal languages of Europe. Balbi retired to Padua
and there died on the 14th of March 1848. His son, Eugenio Balbi
(1812-1884), followed a similar career, being professor of geography at
Pavia, and publishing his father's _Scritti Geografici_ (Turin, 1841), and
original works in _Gea, ossia la terra_ (Trieste, 1854-1867) and _Saggio di
geografia_ (Milan, 1868).