BALDI, BERNARDINO (1533-1617), Italian mathematician and miscellaneous
writer, was descended of a noble family at Urbino, in which city he was
born on the 6th of June 1533. He pursued his studies at Padua with
extraordinary zeal and success, and is said to have acquired, during the
course of his life, no fewer than sixteen languages, though according to
Tiraboschi the inscription on his tomb limits the number to twelve. The
appearance of the plague at Padua obliged him to retire to his native city,
whence he was, shortly afterwards, called to act as tutor to Ferrante
(Ferdinand) Gonzaga, from whom he received the rich abbey of Guastalla. He
held office as abbot for twenty-five years, and then retired to his native
town. In 1612 he was employed by the duke as his envoy to Venice, where he
distinguished himself by the congratulatory oration he delivered before the
Venetian senate on the election of the new doge, Andrea Memmo. Baldi died
at Urbino on the 12th of October 1617. He was, perhaps, the most universal
genius of his age, and is said to have written upwards of a hundred
different works, the chief part of which have remained unpublished. His
various works give satisfactory evidence of his abilities as a theologian,
mathematician, geographer, antiquary, historian and poet. The _Cronica dei
Matematici_ (published at Urbino in 1707) is an abridgment of a larger
work, on which he had bestowed twelve years of labour, and which was
intended to contain the lives of more than two hundred mathematicians. His
life has been written by Affò, Mazzuchelli and others.