BALDUS DE UBALDIS, PETRUS (1327-1406), Italian jurist, a member of the
noble family of the Ubaldi (Baldeschi), was born at Perugia in 1327, and
studied civil law there under Bartolus, being admitted to the degree of
doctor of civil law at the early age of seventeen. Federicus Petrucius of
Siena is said to have been the master under whom he studied canon law. Upon
his promotion to the doctorate he at once proceeded to Bologna, where he
taught law for three years; after which he was advanced to a professorship
at Perugia, where he remained for thirty-three years. He taught law
subsequently at Pisa, at Florence, at Padua and at Pavia, at a time when
the schools of law in those universities disputed the palm with the school
of Bologna. He died at Pavia on the 28th of April 1406. The extant works of
Baldus hardly bear out the great reputation which he acquired amongst his
contemporaries, due partly to the active part he took in public affairs,
and partly to the fame he acquired by his consultations, of which five
volumes have been published (Frankfort, 1589). Baldus was the master of
Pierre Roger de Beaufort, who became pope under the title of Gregory XI.,
and whose immediate successor, Urban VI., summoned Baldus to Rome to assist
him by his consultations in 1380 against the anti-pope Clement VII.
Cardinal de Zabarella and Paulus Castrensis were also amongst his pupils.
His _Commentary on the Liber Feudorum_, is considered to be one of the best
of his works, which were unfortunately left by him for the most part in an
incomplete state. His brothers Angelus (1328-1407) and Petrus (1335-1400)
were of almost equal eminence with himself as jurists.