BALDNESS[1] (technically _alopecia_, from [Greek: alôpex], a fox, foxes
often having bald patches on their coats), the result of loss of hair,
particularly on the human scalp. So far as remediable alopecia is
concerned, two forms may be distinguished: one the premature baldness so
commonly seen in young men, due to alopecia seborrhoica, the other alopecia
areata, now regarded as an epidemic disease.

Alopecia seborrhoica is that premature baldness so constantly seen, in
which the condition steadily advances from the forehead backwards, until
only a fringe of hair is left on the head. It is always due to the
underlying disease seborrhoea, and though it progresses steadily if
neglected, is yet very amenable to treatment. The two drugs of greatest
value in this trouble are sulphur and salicylic acid, some eighteen grains
of each added to an ounce of vaseline making a good application. This
should be rubbed well into the scalp daily for a prolonged period. Where
the greasiness is objected to, the following salicylic lotion may be
substituted, though the vaseline application has probably the greater
value: [Rx.] Ac. salicyl. [dr.] i-iv; Ol. ricini [dr.] ii-iv; Ol. ros.
geran. [min.] x; Spt. vini ad [oz.] vi. The head must be frequently
cleansed, and in very mild cases a daily washing with soap spirit will at
times effect a cure unaided.

Alopecia areata is characterized by the development of round patches more
or less completely denuded of hair. It is most commonly observed on the
scalp, though it may occur on any part of the body where hair is naturally
present. The patches are rounded, smooth and somewhat depressed owing to
the loss of a large proportion of the follicles. At the margin of the
patches short broken hairs are usually to be seen. Clinical evidence is
steadily accumulating to show that this disease may be transmitted.
Organisms are invariably present, in some cases few in number, but in
others very abundant and forming a continuous sheath round the hair. They
were first described by Dr George Thin, who gave them the name of
_Bacterium decalvens_. The disease must be distinguished from
ringworm--especially the bald variety; but though this is at times somewhat
difficult clinically, the use of the microscope leaves no room for doubt.
It must be remembered that for patients under forty years of age, time
alone will generally bring about the desired end, though treatment
undoubtedly hastens recovery. After forty every year added to the patient's
age makes the prognosis less good. The general hygiene and mode of life of
the sufferer must be very carefully attended to, and any weakness suitably
treated. The following lotion should be applied daily to the affected
parts, at first cautiously, later more vigorously, and in stronger
solution:--[Rx.] Acidi lactici [dr.] i-[oz.] i; Ol. ricini [dr.] ii; Spt.
vini ad [oz.] iv.

The loss of hair following acute fevers must be treated by keeping the hair
short, applying stimulating lotions to the scalp, and attending to the
general hygiene of the patient.

[1] The adjective "bald" M. E. "balled" is usually explained as literally
"round and smooth like a ball," but it may be connected with a stem _bal_,
white or shining. The Greek [Greek: phalakros] certainly suggests some such
derivation.