BALES [BALESIUS], PETER (1547-1610?), English calligraphist, one of the
inventors of shorthand writing, was born in London in 1547, and is
described by Anthony Wood as a "most dexterous person in his profession, to
the great wonder of scholars and others." We are also informed that "he
spent several years in sciences among Oxonians, particularly, as it seems,
in Gloucester Hall; but that study, which he used for a diversion only,
proved at length an employment of profit." He is mentioned for his skill in
micrography in Holinshed's _Chronicle_. "Hadrian Junius," says Evelyn,
"speaking as a miracle of somebody who wrote the Apostles' Creed and the
beginning of St John's Gospel within the compass of a farthing: what would
he have said of our famous Peter Bales, who, in the year 1575, wrote the
Lord's Prayer, the Creed, Decalogue, with two short prayers in Latin, his
own name, motto, day of the month, year of the Lord, and reign of the
queen, to whom he presented it at Hampton Court, all of it written within
the circle of a single penny, inchased in a ring and borders of gold, and
covered with a crystal, so accurately wrought as to be very plainly
legible; to the great admiration of her majesty, the whole privy council,
and several ambassadors then at court?" Bales was likewise very dexterous
in imitating handwritings, and between 1576 and 1590 was employed by
Secretary Walsingham in certain political manoeuvres. We find him at the
head of a school near the Old Bailey, London, in 1590, in which year he
published his _Writing Schoolemaster, in three Parts_. This book included
an _Arte of Brachygraphie_, which is one of the earliest attempts to
construct a system of shorthand. In 1595 he had a great trial of skill with
one Daniel Johnson, for a golden pen of £20 value, and won it; and a
contemporary author further relates that he had also the arms of
calligraphy given him, which are azure, a pen or. Bales died about the year
1610.