BALFE, MICHAEL WILLIAM (1808-1870), Irish musical composer, was born on the
15th of May 1808, at Dublin. His musical gifts became apparent at an early
age. The only instruction he received was from his father, who was a
dancing master, and from a musician, C. E. Horn (1786-1849). Between 1814
and 1815 he played the violin for his father's dancing-classes, and at the
age of seven composed a polacca. In 1817 he appeared as a violinist in
public, and in this year composed a ballad, first called "Young Fanny" and
afterwards, when sung in _Paul Pry_ by Madame Vestris, "The Lovers'
Mistake." On the death of his father in 1823 he was engaged in the
orchestra of Drury Lane, and being in possession of a small but pleasant
baritone voice, he chose the career of an operatic singer. An unsuccessful
début was made at Norwich in _Der Freischütz_. In 1825 he was taken to Rome
by Count Mazzara, being introduced to Cherubini on the way. In Italy he
wrote his first dramatic work, a ballet, _La Pérouse_. At the close of 1827
he appeared as Figaro in Rossini's _Barbière_, at the Italian opera in
Paris. Balfe soon returned to Italy, where, during the next nine years, he
remained, singing at various theatres and composing a number of operas.
During this time he married Mdlle Luisa Roser, a Hungarian singer whom he
had met at Bergamo. Fétis says that the public indignation roused by an
attempt at "improving" Meyerbeer's opera _Il Crociato_ by interpolated
music of his own compelled Balfe to throw up his engagement at the theatre
La Fenice in Venice. By this time he had produced his first complete opera,
_I Rivali di se stessi_, at Palermo in the carnival season of 1829-1830;
the opera _Un Avvertimento ai gelosi_ at Pavia; and _Enrico Quarto_ at
Milan, where he had been engaged to sing with Malibran at the Scala. He
returned to England in the spring of 1833, and on the 29th of October 1835
his _Siege of Rochelle_ was produced and rapturously received at Drury
Lane. Encouraged by his success, he produced _The Maid of Artois_ on the
27th of May 1836--the success of the opera being confirmed by the exquisite
singing of Malibran. Balfe was a prolific composer, as may be seen from the
following imperfect list of his English operas alone:--_Siege of Rochelle_
(1835); _The Maid of Artois_ (1836); _Catherine Grey_ (1837); _Joan of Arc_
(1837); _Falstaff_ (1838, Lablache in title-rôle); _Amelia, or the Love
Test_ (1838); _Keolanthe_ (1841); _The Bohemian Girl_, his best known work
(1844); _The Daughter of St. Mark_ (1844); _The Enchantress_ (1845); _The
Bondman_ (1846); _The Devil's in it_ (1847); _The Maid of Honour_ (1847);
_The Sicilian Bride_ (1852); _The Rose of Castile_ (1857); _Satanella_
(1858); _Bianca_ (1860); _The Puritan's Daughter_ (1861); _The Armourer of
Nantes_ (1863); _Blanche de Nevers_ (1863). Balfe also wrote several operas
for the Opéra Comique and Grand Opéra in Paris, where MM. Scribe and St
George provided him with the libretti for his _Le Puits d'amour_ (1843) and
his _Les Quatre Fils Aymon_ (1844). His _L'Étoile de Seville_ was written
in 1845 for the Académie Royale. The fact that Balfe was an Irishman, who
produced operas in English, French and Italian with conspicuous success, is
in itself interesting. When to this we add the record of his operatic
impersonations on the stage, the European success of his _Bohemian Girl_,
his picturesque retirement into Hertfordshire in 1864 as a gentleman
farmer, and above all the undeniable gift for creating such pure melodies
as his songs "When other Hearts" and "I dreamt that I dwelt in marble
halls," it is idle to refuse him a prominent place in the history of music.
He wrote much that was trivial, but also much that was enduring. He died on
the 20th of October 1870, and was buried at Kensal Green. In 1882 a
medallion portrait of him was unveiled in Westminster Abbey.