BALLYCASTLE, a seaport and watering-place on the north coast of Co. Antrim,
Ireland, in the north parliamentary division, situated on a bay of the same
name opposite Rathlin Island. Pop. (1901) 1481. It is connected with the
Northern Counties (Midland) railway at Ballymoney by the Ballycastle light
railway. The town consists of two divisions, about a quarter of a mile
apart and connected by a fine avenue. Towards the close of the 18th century
Mr Hugh Boyd, obtaining the estate, devoted himself to the extension and
improvement of the town, establishing manufactures, endowing charities and
building churches; and succeeded in producing a temporary vitality. Upwards
of £150,000, including a large government grant, is said to have been
expended upon the pier and harbour; but the violence of the sea overthrew
the one and the other became filled with sand. To the east of the town are
the remains of Bonamargy Abbey, the burial-place of many of the MacDonnell
family. The Carey brook, by the side of which the abbey stands, was
formerly called the Margy, and on its waters according to tradition dwelt
the four children of Lir, changed to swans by their step-mother until St
Columba released them from enchantment. (See P. W. Joyce, _Old Celtic
Romances_.) With this well-known romance is connected the wide-spread
belief in Ireland of ill-fortune following the killing of a swan.
Coal-seams, formerly extensively worked, and from an unknown [v.03 p.0282]
period of antiquity, appear in the cliffs towards Fair Head, and the
fisheries are important. The coast-scenery and the view from the hill of
Knocklayd are notable.