BALLINA, a seaport and market-town of county Mayo, Ireland, in the north
parliamentary division, on the left bank of the river Moy, with a station
on the Killala branch of the Midland Great Western railway. Pop. of urban
district (1901) 4505. Across the river, and therefore in county Sligo, is
the suburb of Ardnaree, connected with Ballina by two bridges. In Ardnaree
is the Roman Catholic cathedral (diocese of Killala), with an east window
of Munich glass, and the ruins of an Augustinian abbey (1427) adjoining.
There is a Roman Catholic diocesan college and the Protestant parish church
is also in Ardnaree. A convent was erected in 1867. In trade and population
Ballina is the first town in the county. The salmon-fishery and fish-curing
are important branches of its trade; and it has also breweries and
flour-mills and manufactures snuff and coarse linen. On the 25th of August
1798, Ballina was entered by the French under General Humbert, marching
from their landing-place at Killala. In the neighbourhood there is the
interesting cromlech of the four Maels, which, if actually erected over the
criminals whose name it bears, is proved by the early annals of Ireland to
belong to the 7th century A.D. Their story relates that these men,
foster-brothers of Cellach, bishop of Kilmore-Moy, murdered him at the
instigation of Guaire Aidhne, king of Connaught, but were themselves
executed at Ardnare (_Ard-na-riaghadh_, the hill of the executions) by the
bishop's brother. The Moy is a notable salmon river for rod-fishing and its
tributaries and the neighbouring lakes contain trout.