BALLOU, HOSEA (1771-1852), American Universalist clergyman, was born in
Richmond, New Hampshire, on the 30th of April 1771. He was a son of Maturin
Ballou, a Baptist minister, was self-educated, early devoted himself to the
ministry, became a convert to Universalism in 1789, and in 1794 became a
pastor of a congregation at Dana, Massachusetts. He preached at Barnard,
Vermont, and the surrounding towns in 1801-1807; at Portsmouth, New
Hampshire, in 1807-1815; at Salem, Massachusetts, in 1815-1817; and as
pastor of the Second Universalist Church in Boston from December 1817 until
his death there on the 7th of June 1852. He founded and edited _The
Universalist Magazine_ (1819; later called _The Trumpet_) and _The
Universalist Expositor_ (1831; later _The Universalist Quarterly Review_);
wrote about 10,000 sermons, many hymns, essays and polemic theological
works; and is best known for _Notes on the Parables_ (1804), _A Treatise on
Atonement_ (1805) and _Examination of the Doctrine of a Future Retribution_
(1834); in these, especially the second, he showed himself the principal
American expositor of Universalism. His great contribution to his Church
was the body of denominational literature he left. From the theology of
John Murray, who like Ballou has been called "the father of American
Universalism," he differed in that he divested Universalism of every trace
of Calvinism and opposed legalism and trinitarian views.

Consult the biography by Thomas Whittemore (4 vols., Boston, 1854-1855) and
that by Oscar F. Safford (Boston, 1889); and J. C. Adams, _Hosea Ballou and
the Gospel Renaissance_ (Boston, 1904).

His grand-nephew, HOSEA BALLOU (1796-1861), born in Halifax, Vermont, on
the 18th of October 1796, preached to Universalists in Stafford,
Connecticut (1815-1821); and in Massachusetts, in Roxbury (1821-1838) and
in Medford (1838-1853); and in 1853 was elected first president of Tufts
College at Medford, serving in that office until shortly before his death,
which took place at Somerville, Massachusetts, on the 27th of May 1861. He
was the first (1847) to urge the necessity of a Universalist denominational
college, and this did much towards the establishment of Tufts. He was
associated with the elder Hosea Ballou in editing _The Universalist
Quarterly Review_; edited an edition of Sismondi's _History of the
Crusades_ (1833); and wrote the _Ancient History of Universalism_, down to
A.D. 553 (1829; 2nd ed., 1842).

MATURIN MURRAY BALLOU (1820-1895), son of the first Hosea, was a pioneer in
American illustrated journalism, edited _Gleason's Pictorial_ and _Ballou's
Monthly_ and many collections of quotations, and in 1872 became
editor-in-chief of the _Boston Daily Globe_, of which he was one of the
founders. He wrote a life of his father (1860), and a _History of Cuba_
(1854).