BALL (in Mid. Eng. _bal_; the word is probably cognate with "bale,"
Teutonic in origin, cf. also Lat. _follis_, and Gr. [Greek: palla]), any
rounded body, particularly one with a smooth surface, whether used for
games, as a missile, or applied to such rounded bodies as the protuberance
at the root of the thumb or the big toe, to an enarthrosis, or "ball
socket" joint, such as that of the hip or shoulder, and the like. A ball,
as the essential feature in nearly every form of game requiring physical
exertion, must date from the very earliest times. A rolling object appeals
not only to a human baby but to a kitten and a puppy. Some form of game
with a ball is found portrayed on Egyptian monuments, and is played among
the least advanced of savage tribes at the present day. In Homer, Nausicaa
was playing at ball with her maidens when Odysseus first saw her in the
land of the Phaeacians (_Od_. vi. 100). And Halios and Laodamas performed
before Alcinous and Odysseus with ball play, accompanied with dancing
(_Od_. viii. 370). The Hebrews, the least athletic of races, have no
mention of the ball in their scriptures. Among the Greeks games with balls
([Greek: sphairai]) were regarded as a useful subsidiary to the more
violent athletic exercises, as a means of keeping the body supple, and
rendering it graceful, but were generally left to boys and girls. Similarly
at Rome they were looked upon as an adjunct to the bath, and were graduated
to the age and health of the bathers, and usually a place
(_sphaeristerium_) was set apart for them in the baths (_thermae_). Of
regular rules for the playing of ball games, little trace remains, if there
were any such. The names in Greek for various forms, which have come down
to us in such works as the [Greek: Onomastikon] of Pollux of Naucratis,
imply little or nothing of such; thus, [Greek: aporraxis] only means the
putting of the ball on the ground with the open hand, [Greek: ourania], the
flinging of the ball in the air to be caught by two or more players;
[Greek: phaininda] would seem to be a game of catch played by two or more,
where feinting is used as a test of quickness and skill. Pollux (i. x. 104)
mentions a game called [Greek: episkuros], which has often been looked on
as the origin of football. It seems to have been played by two sides,
arranged in lines; how far there was any form of "goal" seems uncertain.
Among the Romans there appear to have been three types or sizes of ball,
the _pila_, or small ball, used in catching games, the _paganica_, a heavy
ball stuffed with feathers, and the _follis_, a leather ball filled with
air, the largest of the three. This was struck from player to player, who
wore a kind of gauntlet on the arm. There was a game known as _trigon_,
played by three players standing in [v.03 p.0264] the form of a triangle,
and played with the _follis_, and also one known as _harpastum_, which
seems to imply a "scrimmage" among several players for the ball.[1] These
games are known to us through the Romans, though the names are Greek. The
various modern games played with a ball or balls and subject to rules are
treated under their various names, such as polo, cricket, football, &c.

From Fr. _bal_, _baller_, to dance (late Lat. _ballare_, and hence
connected with "ballad," "ballet") comes "ball," meaning a dance, and
especially a social gathering of people for the purpose of dancing.

[1] Martial (iv. 19. 6) calls the _harpastum_, _pulverulentum_, implying
that it involves a considerable amount of exertion.