BALLISTICS (from the Gr. [Greek: ballein], to throw), the science of
throwing warlike missiles or projectiles. It is now divided into two
parts:--_Exterior Ballistics_, in which the motion of the projectile is
considered after it has received its initial impulse, when the projectile
is moving freely under the influence of gravity and the resistance of the
air, and it is required to determine the circumstances so as to hit a
certain object, with a view to its destruction or perforation; and
_Interior Ballistics_, in which the pressure of the powder-gas is analysed
in the bore [v.03 p.0271] of the gun, and the investigation is carried out
of the requisite charge of powder to secure the initial velocity of the
projectile without straining the gun unduly. The calculation of the stress
in the various parts of the gun due to the powder pressure is dealt with in
the article ORDNANCE.

I. EXTERIOR BALLISTICS.

In the ancient theory due to Galileo, the resistance of the air is ignored,
and, as shown in the article on MECHANICS (§ 13), the trajectory is now a
_parabola_. But this theory is very far from being of practical value for
most purposes of gunnery; so that a first requirement is an accurate
experimental knowledge of the resistance of the air to the projectiles
employed, at all velocities useful in artillery. The theoretical
assumptions of Newton and Euler (_hypotheses magis mathematicae quam
naturales_) of a resistance varying as some simple power of the velocity,
for instance, as the square or cube of the velocity (the quadratic or cubic
law), lead to results of great analytical complexity, and are useful only
for provisional extrapolation at high or low velocity, pending further
experiment.

The foundation of our knowledge of the resistance of the air, as employed
in the construction of ballistic tables, is the series of experiments
carried out between 1864 and 1880 by the Rev. F. Bashforth, B.D. (_Report
on the Experiments made with the Bashforth Chronograph_, &c., 1865-1870;
_Final Report_, &c., 1878-1880; _The Bashforth Chronograph_, Cambridge,
1890). According to these experiments, the resistance of the air can be
represented by no simple algebraical law over a large range of velocity.
Abandoning therefore all a priori theoretical assumption, Bashforth set to
work to measure experimentally the velocity of shot and the resistance of
the air by means of equidistant electric screens furnished with vertical
threads or wire, and by a chronograph which measured the instants of time
at which the screens were cut by a shot flying nearly horizontally.
Formulae of the calculus of finite differences enable us from the
chronograph records to infer the velocity and retardation of the shot, and
thence the resistance of the air.

As a first result of experiment it was found that the resistance of similar
shot was proportional, at the same velocity, to the surface or cross
section, or square of the diameter. The resistance R can thus be divided
into two factors, one of which is d^2, where d denotes the diameter of the
shot in inches, and the other factor is denoted by p, where p is the
resistance in pounds at the same velocity to a similar 1-in. projectile;
thus R = d^2p, and the value of p, for velocity ranging from 1600 to 2150
ft. per second (f/s) is given in the second column of the extract from the
abridged ballistic table below.

These values of p refer to a standard density of the air, of 534.22 grains
per cubic foot, which is the density of dry air at sea-level in the
latitude of Greenwich, at a temperature of 62° F. and a barometric height
of 30 in.

But in consequence of the humidity of the climate of England it is better
to suppose the air to be (on the average) two-thirds saturated with aqueous
vapour, and then the standard temperature will be reduced to 60° F., so as
to secure the same standard density; the density of the air being reduced
perceptibly by the presence of the aqueous vapour.

It is further assumed, as the result of experiment, that the resistance is
proportional to the density of the air; so that if the standard density
changes from unity to any other relative density denoted by [tau], then R =
[tau]d^2p, and [tau] is called the _coefficient of tenuity_.

The factor [tau] becomes of importance in long range high angle fire, where
the shot reaches the higher attenuated strata of the atmosphere; on the
other hand, we must take [tau] about 800 in a calculation of shooting under
water.

The resistance of the air is reduced considerably in modern projectiles by
giving them a greater length and a sharper point, and by the omission of
projecting studs, a factor [kappa], called the _coefficient of shape_,
being introduced to allow for this change.

For a projectile in which the ogival head is struck with a radius of 2
diameters, Bashforth puts [kappa] = 0.975; on the other hand, for a
flat-headed projectile, as required at proof-butts, [kappa] = 1.8, say 2 on
the average.

For spherical shot [kappa] is not constant, and a separate ballistic table
must be constructed; but [kappa] may be taken as 1.7 on the average.

Lastly, to allow for the superior centering of the shot obtainable with the
breech-loading system, Bashforth introduces a factor [sigma], called the
_coefficient of steadiness_.

This steadiness may vary during the flight of the projectile, as the shot
may be unsteady for some distance after leaving the muzzle, afterwards
steadying down, like a spinning-top. Again, [sigma] may increase as the gun
wears out, after firing a number of rounds.

Collecting all the coefficients, [tau], [kappa], [sigma], into one, we put

  (1)     R = nd^2p = nd^2f(v), where
  (2)     n = [kappa] [sigma] [tau],

and n is called the _coefficient of reduction_.

By means of a well-chosen value of n, determined by a few experiments, it
is possible, pending further experiment, with the most recent design, to
utilize Bashforth's experimental results carried out with old-fashioned
projectiles fired from muzzle-loading guns. For instance, n = 0.8 or even
less is considered a good average for the modern rifle bullet.

Starting with the experimental values of p, for a standard projectile,
fired under standard conditions in air of standard density, we proceed to
the construction of the ballistic table. We first determine the time t in
seconds required for the velocity of a shot, d inches in diameter and
weighing w lb, to fall from any initial velocity V(f/s) to any final
velocity v(f/s). The shot is supposed to move horizontally, and the curving
effect of gravity is ignored.

If [Delta]t seconds is the time during which the resistance of the air, R
lb, causes the velocity of the shot to fall [Delta]v (f/s), so that the
velocity drops from v+½[Delta]v to v-½[Delta]v in passing through the mean
velocity v, then

  (3)     R[Delta]t = loss of momentum in second-pounds,
            = w(v+½[Delta]v)/g - w(v-½[Delta]v)/g = w[Delta]v/g

so that with the value of R in (1),

  (4)     [Delta]t = w[Delta]v/nd^2pg.

We put

  (5)     w/nd^2 = C,

and call C the ballistic coefficient (driving power) of the shot, so that

  (6)     [Delta]t = C[Delta]T, where
  (7)     [Delta]T = [Delta]v/gp,

and [Delta]T is the time in seconds for the velocity to drop [Delta]v of
the standard shot for which C=1, and for which the ballistic table is
calculated.

Since p is determined experimentally and tabulated as a function of v, the
velocity is taken as the argument of the ballistic table; and taking
[Delta]v = 10, the average value of p in the interval is used to determine
[Delta]T.

Denoting the value of T at any velocity v by T(v), then

  (8)     T(v) = sum of all the preceding values of [Delta]T plus an
      arbitrary constant, expressed by the notation
  (9)     T(v) = [Sum]([Delta]v)/gp + a constant, or [Integral]dv/gp + a
      constant, in which p is supposed known as a function of v.

The constant may be any arbitrary number, as in using the table the
difference only is required of two tabular values for an initial velocity V
and final velocity v and thus

  (10)     T(V) - T(v) = [Sum,v:V][Delta]v/gp or [Integral,v:V]dv/gp;

and for a shot whose ballistic coefficient is C

  (11)     t = C[T(V) - T(v)].

To save the trouble of proportional parts the value of T(v) for unit
increment of v is interpolated in a full-length extended ballistic table
for T.

Next, if the shot advances a distance [Delta]s ft. in the time [Delta]t,
during which the velocity falls from v+½[Delta]v to v-½[Delta]v, we have

  (12)     R[Delta]s = loss of kinetic energy in foot-pounds
            =w(v+½[Delta]v)^2/g - w(v-½[Delta]v)^2/g = wv[Delta]v/g, so
                that
  (13)     [Delta]s = wv[Delta]v/nd^2pg = C[Delta]S, where
  (14)     [Delta]S = v[Delta]v/gp = v[Delta]T,

and [Delta]S is the advance in feet of a shot for which C=1, while the
velocity falls [Delta]v in passing through the average velocity v.

Denoting by S(v) the sum of all the values of [Delta]S up to any assigned
velocity v,

  (15)     S(v) = [Sum]([Delta]S) + a constant, by which S(v) is calculated
      from [Delta]S, and then between two assigned velocities V and v,

  (16)     S(V) - S(v) = [Sum,v:V][Delta]T = [Sum]v[Delta]v/gp or
      [Integral,v:V]vdv/gp,

and if s feet is the advance of a shot whose ballistic coefficient is C,

  (17)     s = C[S(V) - S(v)].

In an extended table of S, the value is interpolated for unit increment of
velocity.

A third table, due to Sir W. D. Niven, F.R.S., called the _degree_ table,
determines the change of direction of motion of the shot while the velocity
changes from V to v, the shot flying nearly horizontally.

To explain the theory of this table, suppose the tangent at the point of
the trajectory, where the velocity is v, to make an angle i radians with
the horizon.

Resolving normally in the trajectory, and supposing the resistance of the
air to act tangentially,

  (18)     v(di/dt) = g cos i,

where di denotes the infinitesimal _decrement_ of i in the infinitesimal
increment of time dt_.

[v.03 p.0272] In a problem of direct fire, where the trajectory is flat
enough for cos i to be undistinguishable from unity, equation (16) becomes

  (19)     v(di/dt) = g, or di/dt = g/v;

so that we can put

  (20)     [Delta]i/[Delta]t = g/v

if v denotes the mean velocity during the small finite interval of time
[Delta]t, during which the direction of motion of the shot changes through
[Delta]i radians.

If the inclination or change of inclination in degrees is denoted by
[delta] or [Delta][delta],

  (21)     [delta]/180 = i/[pi], so that

  (22)     [Delta][delta] = 180/[pi] [Delta]i = 180g/[pi] [Delta]t/v;

and if [delta] and i change to D and I for the standard projectile,

  (23)     [Delta]I = g [Delta]T/v = [Delta]v/vp,
           [Delta]D = 180g/[pi] [Delta]T/v, and

  (24)     I(V) - I(v) = [Sum,v:V][Delta]v/vp or [Integral,v:V]dv/vp,
           D(V) - D(v) = 180/[pi] [I(V) - I(v)].

The differences [Delta]D and [Delta]I are thus calculated, while the values
of D(v) and I(v) are obtained by summation with the arithmometer, and
entered in their respective columns.

For some purposes it is preferable to retain the circular measure, i
radians, as being undistinguishable from sin i and tan i when i is small as
in direct fire.

The last function A, called the _altitude function_, will be explained when
high angle fire is considered.

These functions, T, S, D, I, A, are shown numerically in the following
extract from an abridged ballistic table, in which the velocity is taken as
the argument and proceeds by an increment of 10 f/s; the column for p is
the one determined by experiment, and the remaining columns follow by
calculation in the manner explained above. The initial values of T, S, D,
I, A must be accepted as belonging to the anterior portion of the table.

In any region of velocity where it is possible to represent p with
sufficient accuracy by an empirical formula composed of a single power of
v, say v^m, the integration can be effected which replaces the summation in
(10), (16), and (24); and from an analysis of the Krupp experiments Colonel
Zabudski found the most appropriate index m in a region of velocity as
given in the following table, and the corresponding value of gp, denoted by
f(v) or v^m/k or its equivalent Cr, where r is the retardation.

  ABRIDGED BALLISTIC TABLE.

  -----+--------+-------+---------+-------+----------+-------+--------
   v.  |   p.  [Delta]T.|  T.    [Delta]S.|  S.     [Delta]D.| D.
  -----+--------+-------+---------+-------+----------+-------+--------
  f/s  |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1600 | 11.416 | .0271 | 27.5457 | 43.47 | 18587.00 | .0311 | 49.7729
  1610 | 11.540 | .0268 | 27.5728 | 43.27 | 18630.47 | .0306 | 49.8040
  1620 | 11.662 | .0265 | 27.5996 | 43.08 | 18673.74 | .0301 | 49.8346
  1630 | 11.784 | .0262 | 27.6261 | 42.90 | 18716.82 | .0296 | 49.8647
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1640 | 11.909 | .0260 | 27.6523 | 42.72 | 18759.72 | .0291 | 49.8943
  1650 | 12.030 | .0257 | 27.6783 | 42.55 | 18802.44 | .0287 | 49.9234
  1660 | 12.150 | .0255 | 27.7040 | 42.39 | 18844.99 | .0282 | 49.9521
  1670 | 12.268 | .0252 | 27.7295 | 42.18 | 18887.38 | .0277 | 49.9803
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1680 | 12.404 | .0249 | 27.7547 | 41.98 | 18929.56 | .0273 | 50.0080
  1690 | 12.536 | .0247 | 27.7796 | 41.78 | 18971.54 | .0268 | 50.0353
  1700 | 12.666 | .0244 | 27.8043 | 41.60 | 19013.32 | .0264 | 50.0621
  1710 | 12.801 | .0242 | 27.8287 | 41.41 | 19054.92 | .0260 | 50.0885
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1720 | 12.900 | .0239 | 27.8529 | 41.23 | 19096.33 | .0256 | 50.1145
  1730 | 13.059 | .0237 | 27.8768 | 41.06 | 19137.56 | .0252 | 50.1401
  1740 | 13.191 | .0234 | 27.9005 | 40.90 | 19178.62 | .0248 | 50.1653
  1750 | 13.318 | .0232 | 27.9239 | 40.69 | 19219.52 | .0244 | 50.1901
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1760 | 13.466 | .0230 | 27.9471 | 40.53 | 19260.21 | .0240 | 50.2145
  1770 | 13.591 | .0227 | 27.9701 | 40.33 | 19300.74 | .0236 | 50.2385
  1780 | 13.733 | .0225 | 27.9928 | 40.19 | 19341.07 | .0233 | 50.2621
  1790 | 13.862 | .0223 | 28.0153 | 40.00 | 19381.26 | .0229 | 50.2854
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1800 | 14.002 | .0221 | 28.0376 | 39.81 | 19421.26 | .0225 | 50.3083
  1810 | 14.149 | .0219 | 28.0597 | 39.68 | 19461.07 | .0222 | 50.3308
  1820 | 14.269 | .0217 | 28.0816 | 39.51 | 19500.75 | .0219 | 50.3530
  1830 | 14.414 | .0214 | 28.1033 | 39.34 | 19540.26 | .0216 | 50.3749
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1840 | 14.552 | .0212 | 28.1247 | 39.17 | 19579.60 | .0212 | 50.3965
  1850 | 14.696 | .0210 | 28.1459 | 39.01 | 19618.77 | .0209 | 50.4177
  1860 | 14.832 | .0209 | 28.1669 | 38.90 | 19657.78 | .0206 | 50.4386
  1870 | 14.949 | .0207 | 28.1878 | 38.75 | 19696.68 | .0203 | 50.4592
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1880 | 15.090 | .0205 | 28.2085 | 38.61 | 19735.43 | .0200 | 50.4795
  1890 | 15.224 | .0203 | 28.2290 | 38.46 | 19774.04 | .0198 | 50.4995
  1900 | 15.364 | .0201 | 28.2493 | 38.32 | 19812.50 | .0195 | 50.5193
  1910 | 15.496 | .0199 | 28.2694 | 38.19 | 19850.82 | .0192 | 50.5388
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1920 | 15.656 | .0197 | 28.2893 | 38.01 | 19889.01 | .0189 | 50.5580
  1930 | 15.809 | .0196 | 28.3090 | 37.83 | 19927.02 | .0186 | 50.5769
  1940 | 15.968 | .0194 | 28.3286 | 37.66 | 19964.85 | .0184 | 50.5955
  1950 | 16.127 | .0192 | 28.3480 | 37.48 | 20002.51 | .0181 | 50.6139
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  1960 | 16.302 | .0190 | 28.3672 | 37.26 | 20039.99 | .0178 | 50.6320
  1970 | 16.484 | .0187 | 28.3862 | 36.99 | 20077.25 | .0175 | 50.6498
  1980 | 16.689 | .0185 | 28.4049 | 36.73 | 20114.24 | .0172 | 50.6673
  1990 | 16.888 | .0183 | 28.4234 | 36.47 | 20150.97 | .0169 | 50.6845
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  2000 | 17.096 | .0181 | 28.4417 | 36.21 | 20187.44 | .0166 | 50.7014
  2010 | 17.305 | .0178 | 28.4598 | 35.95 | 20223.65 | .0163 | 50.7180
  2020 | 17.515 | .0176 | 28.4776 | 35.65 | 20259.60 | .0160 | 50.7343
  2030 | 17.752 | .0174 | 28.4952 | 35.35 | 20295.25 | .0158 | 50.7503
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  2040 | 17.990 | .0171 | 28.5126 | 35.06 | 20330.60 | .0155 | 50.7661
  2050 | 18.229 | .0169 | 28.5297 | 34.77 | 20365.66 | .0152 | 50.7816
  2060 | 18.463 | .0167 | 28.5466 | 34.49 | 20400.43 | .0149 | 50.7968
  2070 | 18.706 | .0165 | 28.5633 | 34.21 | 20434.92 | .0147 | 50.8117
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  2080 | 18.978 | .0163 | 28.5798 | 33.93 | 20469.13 | .0144 | 50.8264
  2090 | 19.227 | .0160 | 28.5961 | 33.60 | 20503.06 | .0141 | 50.8408
  2100 | 19.504 | .0158 | 28.6121 | 33.34 | 20536.66 | .0139 | 50.8549
  2110 | 19.755 | .0156 | 28.6279 | 33.02 | 20570.00 | .0136 | 50.8688
       |        |       |         |       |          |       |
  2120 | 20.010 | .0154 | 28.6435 | 32.76 | 20603.02 | .0134 | 50.8824
  2130 | 20.294 | .0152 | 28.6589 | 32.50 | 20635.78 | .0132 | 50.8958
  2140 | 20.551 | .0150 | 28.6741 | 32.25 | 20688.28 | .0129 | 50.9090
  -----+--------+-------+---------+-------+----------+-------+--------

  -----+--------+---------+---------+-------+---------
   v.  |   p.   |[Delta]I.|    I.  [Delta]A.|    A.
  -----+--------+---------+---------+-------+---------
  f/s  |        |         |         |       |
  1600 | 11.416 | .000543 | .868675 | 37.77 |  8470.36
  1610 | 11.540 | .000534 | .869218 | 37.63 |  8508.13
  1620 | 11.662 | .000525 | .869752 | 37.48 |  8545.76
  1630 | 11.784 | .000517 | .870277 | 37.35 |  8583.24
       |        |         |         |       |
  1640 | 11.909 | .000508 | .870794 | 37.21 |  8620.59
  1650 | 12.030 | .000500 | .871302 | 37.09 |  8657.80
  1660 | 12.150 | .000492 | .871802 | 36.96 |  8694.89
  1670 | 12.268 | .000484 | .872294 | 36.80 |  8731.85
       |        |         |         |       |
  1680 | 12.404 | .000476 | .872778 | 36.65 |  8768.65
  1690 | 12.536 | .000468 | .873254 | 36.50 |  8805.30
  1700 | 12.666 | .000461 | .873722 | 36.35 |  8841.80
  1710 | 12.801 | .000453 | .874183 | 36.21 |  8878.15
       |        |         |         |       |
  1720 | 12.900 | .000446 | .874636 | 36.07 |  8914.36
  1730 | 13.059 | .000439 | .875082 | 35.94 |  8950.43
  1740 | 13.191 | .000432 | .875521 | 35.81 |  8986.37
  1750 | 13.318 | .000425 | .875953 | 35.65 |  9022.18
       |        |         |         |       |
  1760 | 13.466 | .000419 | .876378 | 35.53 |  9057.83
  1770 | 13.591 | .000412 | .876797 | 35.37 |  9093.36
  1780 | 13.733 | .000406 | .877209 | 35.26 |  9128.73
  1790 | 13.862 | .000400 | .877615 | 35.11 |  9163.99
       |        |         |         |       |
  1800 | 14.002 | .000393 | .878015 | 34.96 |  9199.10
  1810 | 14.149 | .000388 | .878408 | 34.86 |  9234.06
  1820 | 14.269 | .000382 | .878796 | 34.73 |  9268.92
  1830 | 14.414 | .000376 | .879178 | 34.59 |  9303.65
       |        |         |         |       |
  1840 | 14.552 | .000370 | .879554 | 34.46 |  9338.24
  1850 | 14.696 | .000365 | .879924 | 34.33 |  9372.70
  1860 | 14.832 | .000360 | .880289 | 34.25 |  9407.03
  1870 | 14.949 | .000355 | .880649 | 34.14 |  9441.28
       |        |         |         |       |
  1880 | 15.090 | .000350 | .881004 | 34.02 |  9475.42
  1890 | 15.224 | .000345 | .881354 | 33.91 |  9509.44
  1900 | 15.364 | .000340 | .881699 | 33.80 |  9543.35
  1910 | 15.496 | .000335 | .882039 | 33.69 |  9577.15
       |        |         |         |       |
  1920 | 15.656 | .000330 | .882374 | 33.55 |  9610.84
  1930 | 15.809 | .000325 | .882704 | 33.40 |  9644.39
  1940 | 15.968 | .000320 | .883029 | 33.26 |  9677.79
  1950 | 16.127 | .000316 | .883349 | 33.12 |  9711.05
       |        |         |         |       |
  1960 | 16.302 | .000311 | .883665 | 32.94 |  9744.17
  1970 | 16.484 | .000305 | .883976 | 32.71 |  9777.11
  1980 | 16.689 | .000300 | .884281 | 32.48 |  9809.82
  1990 | 16.888 | .000295 | .884581 | 32.26 |  9842.30
       |        |         |         |       |
  2000 | 17.096 | .000290 | .884876 | 32.05 |  9874.56
  2010 | 17.305 | .000285 | .885166 | 31.83 |  9906.61
  2020 | 17.515 | .000280 | .885451 | 31.57 |  9938.44
  2030 | 17.752 | .000275 | .885731 | 31.32 |  9970.01
       |        |         |         |       |
  2040 | 17.990 | .000270 | .886006 | 31.07 | 10001.33
  2050 | 18.229 | .000265 | .886276 | 30.82 | 10032.40
  2060 | 18.463 | .000260 | .886541 | 30.58 | 10063.33
  2070 | 18.706 | .000256 | .886801 | 30.34 | 10093.80
       |        |         |         |       |
  2080 | 18.978 | .000251 | .887057 | 30.10 | 10124.14
  2090 | 19.227 | .000247 | .887308 | 29.82 | 10154.24
  2100 | 19.504 | .000242 | .887555 | 29.59 | 10184.06
  2110 | 19.755 | .000238 | .887797 | 29.32 | 10213.65
       |        |         |         |       |
  2120 | 20.010 | .000234 | .888035 | 29.10 | 10242.97
  2130 | 20.294 | .000230 | .888269 | 28.88 | 10272.07
  2140 | 20.551 | .000226 | .888499 | 28.66 | 10300.95
  2150 | 20.811 | .000222 | .888725 | 28.44 | 10329.61
  -----+--------+---------+---------+-------+---------

  +------+---------+------------+----------------------------------+
  |  v.  |    m.   |   log k.   |     Cr = gp = f(v) = {v^m}/k.    |
  +------+---------+------------+----------------------------------+
  | 3600 |   1.55  |  2.3909520 | v^{1.55} × log^{-1} [=3].6090480 |
  | 2600 |   1.7   |  2.9038022 | v^{1.7}  × log^{-1} [=3].0961978 |
  | 1800 |   2     |  3.8807404 |  v^2     × log^{-1} [=4].1192596 |
  | 1370 |   3     |  7.0190977 |  v^3     × log^{-1} [=8].9809023 |
  | 1230 |   5     | 13.1981288 |  v^5     × log^{-1}[=14].8018712 |
  | 970  |   3     |  7.2265570 |  v^3     × log^{-1} [=8].7734430 |
  | 790  |   2     |  4.3301086 |  v^2     × log^{-1} [=5].6698914 |
  +------+---------+------------+----------------------------------+

The numbers have been changed from kilogramme-metre to pound-foot units by
Colonel Ingalls, and employed by him in the calculation of an extended
ballistic table, which can be compared with the result of the abridged
table. The calculation can be carried out in each region of velocity from
the formulae:--

  (25) T(V) - T(v) = k [Integral,v:V] v^{-m} dv,
       S(V) - S(v) = k [Integral,v:V] v^{m+1} dv,
       I(V) - I(v) = gk [Integral,v:V] v^{-m-1} dv,

and the corresponding integration.

The following exercises will show the application of the ballistic table. A
slide rule should be used for the arithmetical operations, as it works to
the accuracy obtainable in practice.

_Example_ 1.--Determine the time t sec. and distance s ft. in which the
velocity falls from 2150 to 1600 f/s.

  (a) of a 6-in. shot weighing 100lb, taking n = 0.96,
  (b) of a rifle bullet, 0.303-in. calibre, weighing half an ounce, taking
      n = 0.8.

  ------+------+---------+---------+--------+----------+----------+--------
    V.  |  v.  |  T(V).  |  T(v).  |   t/C. |   S(V)   |   S(v)   |   s/C.
  ------+------+---------+---------+--------+----------+----------+--------
   2150 | 1600 | 28.6891 | 27.5457 | 1.1434 | 20700.53 | 18587.00 | 2113.53
  ------+------+---------+---------+--------+----------+----------+--------

  ----+-------+------+-------+--------+-------+---------+-----------------
      |  d.   |  w.  |   C.  |  t/C.  |   t.  |   S/C.  |        s.
  ----+-------+------+-------+--------+-------+---------+-----------------
  (a) | 6     | 100  | 2.894 | 1.1434 | 3.307 | 2113.53 | 6114 (2038 yds.)
  (b) | 0.303 | 1/32 | 0.426 | 1.1434 | 0.486 | 2113.53 |  900 (300 yds.)
  ----+-------+------+-------+--------+-------+---------+-----------------

_Example_ 2.--Determine the remaining velocity v and time of flight t over
a range of 1000 yds. of the same two shot, fired with the same muzzle
velocity V = 2150 f/s.

  ---+----+-----+---------+---------+-----+--------+--------+-------+------
     | S. | s/C.|  S(V).  |  S(v).  | v.  |  T(V). |  T(v). |  t/C. |  t.
  ---+----+-----+---------+---------+-----+--------+--------+-------+------
  (a)|3000| 1037| 20700.53| 19663.53|1861 | 28.6891| 28.1690| 0.5201| 1.505
  (b)|3000| 7050| 20700.53| 13650.53| 920*| 28.6891| 23.0803| 5.6088| 2.387
  ---+----+-----+---------+---------+-----+--------+--------+-------+------

* These numbers are taken from a part omitted here of the abridged
ballistic table.

In the calculation of range tables for _direct fire_, defined officially as
"fire from guns with full charge at elevation not exceeding 15°," the
vertical component of the resistance of the air may be ignored as
insensible, and the actual velocity and its horizontal component, or
component parallel to the line of sight, are undistinguishable.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

The equations of motion are now, the co-ordinates x and y being measured in
feet,

  (26)     d^2x/dt^2 = -r = -gp/C,
  (27)     d^2y/dt^2 = -g.

The first equation leads, as before, to

  (28)     t = C{T(V) - T(v)},
  (29)     x = C{S(V) - S(v)}.

The integration of (24) gives

  (30)     dy/dt = constant - gt = g(½T - t),

if T denotes the whole time of flight from O to the point B (fig. 1), where
the trajectory cuts the line of sight; so that ½T is the time to the vertex
A, where the shot is flying parallel to OB.

Integrating (27) again,

  (31)     y = g(½Tt - ½t^2) = ½gt(T - t);

and denoting T - t by t', and taking g = 32f/s^2,

  (32)     y = 16tt',

which is Colonel Sladen's formula, employed in plotting ordinates of a
trajectory.

At the vertex A, where y = H, we have t = t' = ½T, so that

  (33)     H =  1/8gT^2,

which for practical purposes, taking g = 32, is replaced by

  (34)     H = 4T^2, or (2T)^2.

Thus, if the time of flight of a shell is 5 sec., the height of the vertex
of the trajectory is about 100 ft.; and if the fuse is set to burst the
shell one-tenth of a second short of its impact at B, the height of the
burst is 7.84, say 8 ft.

The line of sight Ox, considered horizontal in range table results, may be
inclined slightly to the horizon, as in shooting up or down a moderate
slope, without appreciable modification of (28) and (29), and y or PM is
still drawn vertically to meet OB in M.

Given the ballistic coefficient C, the initial velocity V, and a range of R
yds. or X = 3R ft., the final velocity v is first calculated from (29) by

  (35)     S(v) = S(V) - X/C,

and then the time of flight T by

  (36)     T = C{T(V) - T(v)}.

Denoting the angle of departure and descent, measured in degrees and from
the line of sight OB by [phi] and [beta], the total deviation in the range
OB is (fig. 1)

  (37)     [delta] = [phi] + [beta] = C{D(V) - D(v)}.

To share the [delta] between [phi] and [beta], the vertex A is taken as the
point of _half-time_ (and therefore beyond _half-range_, because of the
continual diminution of the velocity), and the velocity v_0 at A is
calculated from the formula

  (38)     T(v_0) = T(V) - ½T/C = ½{T(V) + T(v)};

and now the degree table for D(v) gives

  (39)     [phi] = C{D(V) - D(v_0)},
  (40)     [beta] = C{D(v_0) - D(v)}.

This value of [phi] is the tangent elevation (T.E.); the quadrant elevation
(Q.E.) is [phi] - S, where S is the angular depression of the line of sight
OB; and if O is h ft. vertical above B, the angle S at a range of R yds. is
given by

  (41)     sin S = h/3R,

or, for a small angle, expressed in minutes, taking the radian as 3438',

  (42)     S = 1146h/R.

So also the angle [beta] must be increased by S to obtain the angle at
which the shot strikes a horizontal plane--the water, for instance.

A systematic exercise is given here of the compilation of a range table by
calculation with the ballistic table; and it is to be compared with the
published official range table which follows.

A discrepancy between a calculated and tabulated result will serve to show
the influence of a slight change in the coefficient of reduction n, and the
muzzle velocity V.

_Example_ 3.--Determine by calculation with the abridged ballistic table
the remaining velocity v, the time of flight t, angle of elevation [phi],
and descent [beta] of this 6-in. gun at ranges 500, 1000, 1500, 2000 yds.,
taking the muzzle velocity V = 2150 f/s, and a coefficient of reduction n =
0.96. [For Table see p. 274.]

An important problem is to determine the alteration of elevation for firing
up and down a slope. It is found that the alteration of the tangent
elevation is almost insensible, but the quadrant elevation requires the
addition or subtraction of the angle of sight.

Example.--Find the alteration of elevation required at a range of 3000 yds.
in the exchange of fire between a ship and a fort 1200 ft. high, a 12-in.
gun being employed on each side, firing a shot weighing 850 lb with
velocity 2150 f/s. The complete ballistic table, and the method of high
angle fire (see below) must be employed.

[v.03 p.0273]

  Range.  s.   s/C.   S(v).    v.    T(v).    t/C.    t.    T(v_0).  v_0
     0     0     0  20700.53  2150  28.6891  0.0000  0.000  28.6891  215
   500  1500   518  20182.53  1999  28.4399  0.2492  0.720  28.5645  207
  1000  3000  1036  19664.53  1862  28.1711  0.5180  1.497  28.4301  199
  1500  4500  1554  19146.53  1732  27.8815  0.8076  2.330  28.2853  191
  2000  6000  2072  18628.53  1610  27.5728  1.1163  3.225  28.1310  184

  Range. v_0.  D(v_0). [phi]/C. [phi].[beta]/C. [beta].
     0   2150  50.9219  0.0000  0.000   0.0000   0.000
   500   2071  50.8132  0.1087  0.315   0.1135   0.328
  1000   1994  50.6913  0.2306  0.666   0.2486   0.718
  1500   1918  50.5542  0.3677  1.062   0.4085   1.181
  2000   1843  50.4029  0.5190  1.500   0.5989   1.734

    +---------------------+----------------------------------+
    | Charge              | weight, 13 lb 4 oz.              |
    |                     | gravimetric density, 55.01/0.504 |
    |                     | nature, cordite, size 30         |
    +---------------------+----------------------------------+
    +---------------------+----------------------------------+
    | Projectile          | Palliser shot, Shrapnel shell.   |
    |                     | Weight, 100lb.                   |
    +---------------------+----------------------------------+
    +---------------------+----------------------------------+
    | Muzzle velocity     | 2154 f/s.                        |
    | Nature of mounting  | pedestal.                        |
    | Jump                | nil.                             |
    +---------------------+----------------------------------+

        A. Remaining Velocity.
        B. To strike an object 10 ft. high range must be known to
        C. Slope of Descent.
        D. 5' elevation or depression alters
           point of impact (Range ... Laterally or Vertically).
        E. Elevation.
        F. Range.
        G. Fuse scale for T. and P. middle No. 54 Marks I., II., or III.
        H. 50% of rounds should fall in: (Length × Breadth × Height).
        I. Time of Flight.
        J. Penetration into Wrought Iron.

  -----+------+-----+----------+------+------+--+------------+------+-----
    A. |   B. |  C. |    D.    |  E.  |   F. |G.|     H.     |   I. |   J.
  -----+------+-----+----------+------+------+--+------------+------+-----
  f/s. | yds. | 1 in|yds. yds. | °  ' | yds. |  |yds yds yds |secs. |  in.
  2154 |  ..  |  .. |  .. 0.00 | 0  0 |    0 |..| ..  ..  .. | 0.00 | 13.6
  2122 | 1145 | 687 | 125 0.14 | 0  4 |  100 | ¼| .. 0.4  .. | 0.16 | 13.4
  2091 |  635 | 381 | 125 0.29 | 0  9 |  200 | ¾| .. 0.4  .. | 0.31 | 13.2
  2061 |  408 | 245 | 125 0.43 | 0 13 |  300 |1 | .. 0.4  .. | 0.47 | 13.0
  2032 |  316 | 190 | 125 0.58 | 0 17 |  400 |1¼| .. 0.4  .. | 0.62 | 12.8
  2003 |  260 | 156 | 125 0.72 | 0 21 |  500 |1¾| .. 0.5 0.2 | 0.78 | 12.6
  1974 |  211 | 127 | 125 0.87 | 0 26 |  600 |2 | .. 0.5 0.2 | 0.95 | 12.4
  1946 |  183 | 110 | 125 1.01 | 0 30 |  700 |2¼| .. 0.5 0.2 | 1.11 | 12.2
  1909 |  163 |  98 | 125 1.16 | 0 34 |  800 |2¾| .. 0.5 0.2 | 1.28 | 12.0
  1883 |  143 |  85 | 125 1.31 | 0 39 |  900 |3 | .. 0.6 0.3 | 1.44 | 11.8
  1857 |  130 |  78 | 125 1.45 | 0 43 | 1000 |3¼| .. 0.6 0.3 | 1.61 | 11.6
  1830 |  118 |  71 | 125 1.60 | 0 47 | 1100 |3¾| .. 0.6 0.3 | 1.78 | 11.4
  1803 |  110 |  66 | 125 1.74 | 0 51 | 1200 |4 | .. 0.6 0.3 | 1.95 | 11.2
  1776 |  101 |  61 | 125 1.89 | 0 55 | 1300 |4½| .. 0.7 0.4 | 2.12 | 11.0
  1749 |   93 |  56 | 125 2.03 | 0 59 | 1400 |4¾| .. 0.7 0.4 | 2.30 | 10.8
  1722 |   86 |  52 | 125 2.18 | 1  3 | 1500 |5 | .. 0.7 0.4 | 2.47 | 10.6
  1695 |   80 |  48 | 125 2.32 | 1  7 | 1600 |5½| 25 0.8 0.5 | 2.65 | 10.5
  1669 |   71 |  43 | 125 2.47 | 1 11 | 1700 |5¾| 25 0.9 0.5 | 2.84 | 10.3
  1642 |   67 |  40 | 100 2.61 | 1 16 | 1800 |6¼| 25 1.0 0.5 | 3.03 | 10.1
  1616 |   61 |  37 | 100 2.76 | 1 22 | 1900 |6½| 25 1.1 0.6 | 3.23 |  9.9
  1591 |   57 |  34 | 100 2.91 | 1 27 | 2000 |7 | 25 1.2 0.6 | 3.41 |  9.7
  -----+------+-----+----------+------+------+--+------------+------+-----

   The last column in the Range Table giving the inches of penetration into
wrought iron is calculated from the remaining velocity by an empirical
formula, as explained in the article ARMOUR PLATES.

_High Angle and Curved Fire._--"High angle fire," as defined officially,
"is fire at elevations greater than 15°," and "curved fire is fire from
howitzers at all angles of elevation not exceeding 15°." In these cases the
curvature of the trajectory becomes considerable, and the formulae employed
in direct fire must be modified; the method generally employed is due to
Colonel Siacci of the Italian artillery.

Starting with the exact equations of motion in a resisting medium,

  (43)     d^2x/dt^2 = -r cos i = -r dx/ds,

  (44)     d^2y/dt^2 = -r sin i - g = -r dy/ds - g,

and eliminating r,

  (45)     dx/dt d^2y/dt^2 - dy/dt d^2x/dt^2 = -g{dx/dt};

and this, in conjunction with

  (46)     tan i = dy/dx = {dy/dt}/{dx/dt},

  (47)     sec^2 i{di/dt} =
           ({dx/dt}{d^2y/dt^2} - {dy/dt}{d^2x/dt^2}) / (dx/dt)^2,

reduces to

  (48)     di/dt = -{g/v} cos i, or {d tan i}/dt = -g/{v cos i},

the equation obtained, as in (18), by resolving normally in the trajectory,
but di now denoting the _increment_ of i in the increment of time dt.

Denoting dx/dt, the horizontal component of the velocity, by q, so that

  (49)     v cos i = q,

equation (43) becomes

  (50)     dq/dt = -r cos i,

and therefore by (48)

  (51)     dq/di = {dq/dt} {dt/di} = {rv}/g.

It is convenient to express r as a function of v in the previous notation

  (52)     Cr = f(v),

and now

  (53)     dq/di = {v f(v)}/{Cg},

an equation connecting q and i.

Now, since v = g sec i

  (54)     dt/dq = -C sec i / f(q sec i),

and multiplying by dx/dt or q,

  (55)     dx/dq = -C q sec i / f(q sec i),

and multiplying by dy/dx or tan i,

  (56)     dy/dq = -C q sec i tan i / f(q sec i);

also

  (57)     di/dq = Cg / {q sec i . f(q sec i)},

  (58)     d tan i/dq = C g sec i / {q . f(q sec i)},

from which the values of t, x, y, i, and tan i are given by integration
with respect to q, when sec i is given as a function of q by means of (51).

Now these integrations are quite intractable, even for a very simple
mathematical assumption of the function f(v), say the quadratic or cubic
law, f(v) = v^2/k or v^3/k.

But, as originally pointed out by Euler, the difficulty can be turned if we
notice that in the ordinary trajectory of practice the quantities i, cos i,
and sec i vary so slowly that they may be replaced by their _mean_ values,
[eta], cos [eta], and sec [eta], especially if the trajectory, when
considerable, is divided up in the calculation into arcs of small
curvature, the curvature of an arc being defined as the angle between the
tangents or normals at the ends of the arc.

Replacing then the angle i on the right-hand side of equations (54) - (56)
by some mean value [eta], we introduce Siacci's pseudo-velocity u defined
by

  (59)     u = q sec [eta],

so that u is a quasi-component parallel to the mean direction of the
tangent, say the direction of the chord of the arc.

[v.03 p.0274] Integrating from any initial pseudo-velocity U,

  (60)     t = C[Integral,u:U] du/f(u),
  (61)     x = C cos [eta] [Integral] u du/f(u),
  (62)     y = C sin [eta] [Integral] u du/f(u);

and supposing the inclination i to change from [phi] to [theta] radians
over the arc,

  (63)     [phi] - [theta] = Cg cos [eta] [Integral] du/{u f(u)},
  (64)     tan [phi] - tan [theta] = Cg sec [eta] [Integral] du/{u f(u)}.

But according to the definition of the functions T, S, I and D of the
ballistic table, employed for direct fire, with u written for v,

  (65)     [Integral,u:U] du/f(u) = [Integral] du/gp = T(U) - T(u),
  (66)     [Integral] u du/f(u) = S(U) - S(u),
  (67)     [Integral] g du/u f(u) = I(U) - I(u);

and therefore

  (68)     t = C[T(U) - T(u)],
  (69)     x = C cos [eta] [S(U) - S(u)],
  (70)     y = C sin [eta] [S(U) - S(u)],
  (71)     [phi] - [theta] = C cos [eta] [I(U) - I(u)],
  (72)     tan [phi] - tan [theta] = C sec [eta] [I(U) - I(u)],

while, expressed in degrees,

  (73)     [phi]° - [theta]° = C cos [eta] [D(U) - D(u)],

The equations (66)-(71) are Siacci's, slightly modified by General
Mayevski; and now in the numerical applications to high angle fire we can
still employ the ballistic table for direct fire.

It will be noticed that [eta] cannot be exactly the same mean angle in all
these equations; but if [eta] is the same in (69) and (70),

  (74)     y/x = tan [eta].

so that [eta] is the inclination of the chord of the arc of the trajectory,
as in Niven's method of calculating trajectories (_Proc. R.S._, 1877): but
this method requires [eta] to be known with accuracy, as 1% variation in
[eta] causes more than 1% variation in tan [eta].

The difficulty is avoided by the use of Siacci's altitude-function A or
A(u), by which y/x can be calculated without introducing sin [eta] or tan
[eta], but in which [eta] occurs only in the form cos [eta] or sec [eta],
which varies very slowly for moderate values of [eta], so that [eta] need
not be calculated with any great regard for accuracy, the arithmetic mean
½([phi] + [theta]) of [phi] and [theta] being near enough for [eta] over
any arc [phi] - [theta] of moderate extent.

Now taking equation (72), and replacing tan [theta], as a variable final
tangent of an angle, by tan i or dy/dx,

  (75)     tan [phi] - dy/dx = C sec [eta] [I(U) - I(u)],

and integrating with respect to x over the arc considered,

  (76)     x tan [phi] - y = C sec [eta] [xI(U) - [Integral,0:x] I(u)dx],

But

  (77)     [Integral,0:x] I(u)dx = [Integral,U:u] I(u) dx/du du
             = C cos [eta] [Integral,x:U] I(u) {u du}/{g f(u)}
             = C cos [eta] [A(U) - A(u)]

in Siacci's notation; so that the altitude-function A must be calculated by
summation from the finite difference [Delta]A, where

  (78)     [Delta]A = I(u) u[Delta]u / gp = I(u)[Delta]S,

or else by an integration when it is legitimate to assume that f(v)=v^m/k
in an interval of velocity in which m may be supposed constant.

Dividing again by x, as given in (76),

  (79)     tan [phi] - y/x =
           C sec [eta] [I(U) - {A(U) - A(u)}/{S(U) - S(u)}]

from which y/x can be calculated, and thence y.

In the application of Siacci's method to the calculation of a trajectory in
high angle fire by successive arcs of small curvature, starting at the
beginning of an arc at an angle [phi] with velocity v_[phi], the curvature
of the arc [phi] - [theta] is first settled upon, and now

  (80)     [eta] = ½([phi] + [theta])

is a good first approximation for [eta].

Now calculate the pseudo-velocity u_[phi] from

  (81)     u_[phi] = v_[phi] cos [phi] sec [eta],

and then, from the given values of [phi] and [theta], calculate u_[theta]
from either of the formulae of (72) or (73):--

  (82)     I(u_[theta]) =
           I(u_[phi]) - {tan [phi] - tan [theta]}/{C sec [eta]},
  (83)     D(u_[theta]) =
           D(u_[phi]) - {[phi]° - [theta]°}/{C cos [eta]}.

Then with the suffix notation to denote the beginning and end of the arc
[phi] - [theta],

  (84)     _[phi]t_[theta] = C[T(u_[phi]) - T(u_[theta])],
  (85)     _[phi]x_[theta] = C cos [eta] [S(u_[phi]) - S(u_[theta])],
  (86)     _[phi](y/x)_[theta] =
           tan [phi] - C sec [eta] [I(u_[phi]) - [Delta]A/[Delta]S];

[Delta] now denoting any finite tabular difference of the function between
the initial and final (pseudo-) velocity.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Also the velocity v_{[theta]} at the end of the arc is given by

  (87)     v_[theta] = u_[theta] sec [theta] cos [eta].

Treating this final velocity v_[theta] and angle [theta] as the initial
velocity v_[phi] and angle [phi] of the next arc, the calculation proceeds
as before (fig. 2).

In the long range high angle fire the shot ascends to such a height that
the correction for the tenuity of the air becomes important, and the
curvature [phi] - [theta] of an arc should be so chosen that
_[phi]y_[theta] the height ascended, should be limited to about 1000 ft.,
equivalent to a fall of 1 inch in the barometer or 3% diminution in the
tenuity factor [tau].

A convenient rule has been given by Captain James M. Ingalls, U.S.A., for
approximating to a high angle trajectory in a single arc, which assumes
that the mean density of the air may be taken as the density at two-thirds
of the estimated height of the vertex; the rule is founded on the fact that
in an unresisted parabolic trajectory the average height of the shot is
two-thirds the height of the vertex, as illustrated in a jet of water, or
in a stream of bullets from a Maxim gun.

The longest recorded range is that given in 1888 by the 9.2-in. gun to a
shot weighing 380 lb fired with velocity 2375 f/s at elevation 40°; the
range was about 12 m., with a time for flight of about 64 sec., shown in
fig. 2.

A calculation of this trajectory is given by Lieutenant A. H. Wolley-Dod,
R.A., in the _Proceedings R.A. Institution_, 1888, employing Siacci's
method and about twenty arcs; and Captain Ingalls, by assuming a mean
tenuity-factor [tau]=0.68, corresponding to a height of about 2 m., on the
estimate that the shot would reach a height of 3 m., was able to obtain a
very accurate result, working in two arcs over the whole trajectory, up to
the vertex and down again (Ingalls, _Handbook of Ballistic Problems_).

Siacci's altitude-function is useful in direct fire, for giving immediately
the angle of elevation [phi] required for a given range of R yds. or X ft.,
between limits V and v of the velocity, and also the angle of descent
[beta].

In direct fire the pseudo-velocities U and u, and the real velocities V and
v, are undistinguishable, and sec [eta] may be replaced by unity so that,
putting y = 0 in (79),

  (88)     tan [phi] = C [I(V) - [Delta]A/[Delta]S].

Also

  (89)     tan [phi] - tan [beta] = C [I(V) - L(v)]

so that

  (90)     tan [beta] = C [[Delta]A/[Delta]S - I(v)],

or, as (88) and (90) may be written for small angles,

  (91)     sin 2[phi] = 2C [I(V) - [Delta]A/[Delta]S],
  (92)     sin 2[beta] = 2C [[Delta]A/[Delta]S - I(v)].

To simplify the work, so as to look out the value of sin 2[phi] without the
intermediate calculation of the remaining velocity v, a double-entry table
has been devised by Captain Braccialini Scipione [v.03 p.0275] (_Problemi
del Tiro_, Roma, 1883), and adapted to yd., ft., in. and lb units by A. G.
Hadcock, late R.A., and published in the _Proc. R.A. Institution_, 1898,
and in _Gunnery Tables_, 1898.

In this table

  (93)     sin 2[phi] = Ca,

where a is a function tabulated for the two arguments, V the initial
velocity, and R/C the reduced range in yards.

The table is too long for insertion here. The results for [phi] and [beta],
as calculated for the range tables above, are also given there for
comparison.

_Drift_.--An elongated shot fired from a rifled gun does not move in a
vertical plane, but as if the mean plane of the trajectory was inclined to
the true vertical at a small angle, 2° or 3°; so that the shot will hit the
mark aimed at if the back sight is tilted to the vertical at this angle
[delta], called the permanent angle of deflection (see SIGHTS).

This effect is called _drift_ and the reason of it is not yet understood
very clearly.

It is evidently a gyroscopic effect, being reversed in direction by a
change from a right to a left-handed twist of rifling, and being increased
by an increase of rotation of the shot.

The axis of an elongated shot would move parallel to itself only if fired
in a vacuum; but in air the couple due to a sidelong motion tends to place
the axis at right angles to the tangent of the trajectory, and acting on a
rotating body causes the axis to precess about the tangent. At the same
time the frictional drag damps the nutation and causes the axis of the shot
to follow the tangent of the trajectory very closely, the point of the shot
being seen to be slightly above and to the right of the tangent, with a
right-handed twist. The effect is as if there was a mean sidelong thrust w
tan [delta] on the shot from left to right in order to deflect the plane of
the trajectory at angle [delta] to the vertical. But no formula has yet
been invented, derived on theoretical principles from the physical data,
which will assign by calculation a definite magnitude to [delta].

An effect similar to drift is observable at tennis, golf, base-ball and
cricket; but this effect is explainable by the inequality of pressure due
to a vortex of air carried along by the rotating ball, and the deviation is
in the opposite direction of the drift observed in artillery practice, so
artillerists are still awaiting theory and crucial experiment.

After all care has been taken in laying and pointing, in accordance with
the rules of theory and practice, absolute certainty of hitting the same
spot every time is unattainable, as causes of error exist which cannot be
eliminated, such as variations in the air and in the muzzle-velocity, and
also in the steadiness of the shot in flight.

To obtain an estimate of the accuracy of a gun, as much actual practice as
is available must be utilized for the calculation in accordance with the
laws of probability of the 50% zones shown in the range table (see
PROBABILITY.)

II. INTERIOR BALLISTICS

The investigation of the relations connecting the pressure, volume and
temperature of the powder-gas inside the bore of the gun, of the work
realized by the expansion of the powder, of the dynamics of the movement of
the shot up the bore, and of the stress set up in the material of the gun,
constitutes the branch of interior ballistics.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

A gun may be considered a simple thermo-dynamic machine or heat-engine
which does its work in a single stroke, and does not act in a series of
periodic cycles as an ordinary steam or gas-engine.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Pressure Curves, from Chronoscope Experiments in 6
inch gun of 100 calibres, with various Explosives.]

An indicator diagram can be drawn for a gun (fig. 3) as for a [v.03 p.0276]
steam-engine, representing graphically by a curve CPD the relation between
the volume and pressure of the powder-gas; and in addition the curves AQE
of energy e, AvV of velocity v, and AtT of time t can be plotted or
derived, the velocity and energy at the muzzle B being denoted by V and E.

After a certain discount for friction and the recoil of the gun, the net
work realized by the powder-gas as the shot advances AM is represented by
the area ACPM, and this is equated to the kinetic energy e of the shot, in
foot-tons,

  (1)     e = {w /2240} (1 + {4k^2 / d^2} tan^2 [delta]) {v^2 / 2g},

in which the factor 4(k^2/d^2)tan^2[delta] represents the fraction due to
the rotation of the shot, of diameter d and axial radius of gyration k, and
[delta] represents the angle of the rifling; this factor may be ignored in
the subsequent calculations as small, less than 1%.

The mean effective pressure (M.E.P.) in tons per sq. in. is represented in
fig. 3 by the height AH, such that the rectangle AHKB is equal to the area
APDB; and the M.E.P. multiplied by ¼[pi]d^2, the cross-section of the bore
in square inches, gives in tons the mean effective thrust of the powder on
the base of the shot; and multiplied again by l, the length in inches of
the travel AB of the shot up the bore, gives the work realized in
inch-tons; which work is thus equal to the M.E.P. multiplied by ¼[pi]d^2l =
B - C, the volume in cubic inches of the rifled part AB of the bore, the
difference between B the total volume of the bore and C the volume of the
powder-chamber.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Velocity Curves, from Chronoscope experiments in 6
inch gun of 100 calibres, with Cordite.]

Equating the muzzle-energy and the work in foot-tons

  (2)     E = w/2240 V^2/2g = {B - C} / 12 × M.E.P.

  (3)     M.E.P. = w/2240 V^2/2g 12/{B - C}

Working this out for the 6-in. gun of the range table, taking L = 216 in.,
we find B - C = 6100 cub. in., and the M.E.P. is about 6.4 tons per sq. in.

But the maximum pressure may exceed the mean in the ratio of 2 or 3 to 1,
as shown in fig. 4, representing graphically the result of Sir Andrew
Noble's experiments with a 6-in. gun, capable of being lengthened to 100
calibres or 50 ft. (_Proc. R.S._, June 1894).

On the assumption of uniform pressure up the bore, practically realizable
in a Zalinski pneumatic dynamite gun, the pressure-curve would be the
straight line HK of fig. 3 parallel to AM; the energy-curve AQE would be
another straight line through A; the velocity-curve AvV, of which the
ordinate v is as the square root of the energy, would be a parabola; and
the acceleration of the shot being constant, the time-curve AtT will also
be a similar parabola.

If the pressure falls off uniformly, so that the pressure-curve is a
straight line PDF sloping downwards and cutting AM in F, then the
energy-curve will be a parabola curving downwards, and the velocity-curve
can be represented by an ellipse, or circle with centre F and radius FA;
while the time-curve will be a sinusoid.

But if the pressure-curve is a straight line F'CP sloping upwards, cutting
AM behind A in F', the energy-curve will be a parabola curving upwards, and
the velocity-curve a hyperbola with center at F'.

These theorems may prove useful in preliminary calculations where the
pressure-curve is nearly straight; but, in the absence of any observable
law, the area of the pressure-curve must be read off by a planimeter, or
calculated by Simpson's rule, as an indicator diagram.

To measure the pressure experimentally in the bore of a gun, the
crusher-gauge is used as shown in fig. 6, nearly full size; it records the
maximum pressure by the compression of a copper cylinder in its interior;
it may be placed in the powder-chamber, or fastened in the base of the
shot.

In Sir Andrew Noble's researches a number of plugs were inserted in the
side of the experimental gun, reaching to the bore and carrying
crusher-gauges, and also chronographic appliances which registered the
passage of the shot in the same manner as the electric screens in
Bashforth's experiments; thence the velocity and energy of the shot was
inferred, to serve as an independent control of the crusher-gauge records
(figs. 4 and 5).

As a preliminary step to the determination of the pressure in the bore of a
gun, it is desirable to measure the pressure obtained by exploding a charge
of powder in a closed vessel, varying the weight of the charge and thereby
the density of the powder-gas.

The earliest experiments of this nature are due to Benjamin Robins in 1743
and Count Rumford in 1792; and their method has been revived by Dr Kellner,
War Department chemist, who employed the steel spheres of bicycle
ball-bearings as safety-valves, loaded to register the pressure at which
the powder-gas will blow off, and thereby check the indications of the
crusher-gauge (_Proc. R.S._, March 1895).

Chevalier d'Arcy, 1760. also experimented on the pressure of powder and the
velocity of the bullet in a musket barrel; this he accomplished by
shortening the barrel successively, and measuring the velocity obtained by
the ballistic pendulum; thus reversing Noble's procedure of gradually
lengthening the gun.

But the most modern results employed with gunpowder are based on the
experiments of Noble and Abel (_Phil. Trans._, 1875-1880-1892-1894 and
following years).

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

A charge of powder, or other explosive, of varying weight P lb, is fired in
an explosion-chamber (fig. 7, scale about 1/5) of which the volume C, cub.
in., is known accurately, and the pressure p, tons per sq. in., was
recorded by a crusher-gauge (fig. 6).

[v.03 p.0277] The result is plotted in figs. 8 and 9, in a curve showing
the relation between p and D the _gravimetric density_, which is the
specific gravity of the P lb of powder when filling the volume C, cub. in.,
in a state of gas; or between p and v, the reciprocal of D, which may be
called the _gravimetric volume_ (G.V.), being the ratio of the volume of
the gas to the volume of an equal weight of water.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. Explosion Vessel.]

The results are also embodied in the following Table;--

                         TABLE 1.
                         Pressure in Tons per sq. in.
      G.D.       G.V.     Pebble Powder.   Cordite.
      0.05      20.00         0.855          3.00
         6      16.66         1.00           3.80
         8      12.50         1.36           5.40
      0.10      10.00         1.76           7.10
        12       8.33         2.06           8.70
        14       7.14         2.53          10.50
        15       6.66         2.73          11.36
        16       6.25         2.96          12.30
        18       5.55         3.33          14.20
        20       5.00         3.77          16.00
        22       4.54         4.26          17.90
        24       4.17         4.66          19.80
        25       4.00         4.88          20.63
        26       3.84         5.10          21.75
        30       3.33         6.07          26.00
        35       2.85         7.35          31.00
        40       2.50         8.73          36.53
        45       2.22        10.23          42.20
        50       2.00        11.25          48.66
        55       1.81        13.62          55.86
        60       1.66        15.55          63.33

The term _gravimetric density_ (G.D.) is peculiar to artillerists; it is
required to distinguish between the specific gravity (S.G.) of the powder
filling a given volume in a state of gas, and the specific gravity of the
separate solid grain or cord of powder.

Thus, for instance, a lump of solid lead of given S.G., when formed into a
charge of lead shot composed of equal spherules closely packed, will have a
G.D. such that

  (4)     G.D. of charge of lead shot
          --------------------------- = 1/6 [pi] [sqrt]2 = 0.7403;
           S.G. of lump of solid lead

while in the case of a bundle of cylindrical sticks of cordite,

  (5)     G.D. of charge of cordite
          -------------------------- = 1/6 [pi] [sqrt]3 = 0.9067.
           S.G. of stick of cordite

At the standard temperature of 62° F. the volume of the gallon of 10 lb of
water is 277.3 cub. in.; or otherwise, 1 cub. ft. or 1728 cub. in. of water
at this temperature weighs 62.35 lb, and therefore 1 lb of water bulks 1728
÷ 62.35 = 27.73 cub. in.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

Thus if a charge of P lb of powder is placed in a chamber of volume C cub.
in., the

  (6)     G.D.= 27.73P/C,  G.V. = C/27.73 P.

Sometimes the factor 27.68 is employed, corresponding to a density of water
of about 62.4 lb per cub. ft., and a temperature 12° C., or 54° F.

With metric units, measuring P in kg., and C in litres, the G.D. = P/C,
G.V. = C/P, no factor being required.

From the Table I., or by quadrature of the curve in fig. 9, the work E in
foot-tons realized by the expansion of 1 lb of the powder from one
gravimetric volume to another is inferred; for if the average pressure is p
tons per sq. in., while the gravimetric volume changes from v - ½[Delta]v
to v + ½[Delta]v, a change of volume of 27.73[Delta]v cub. in., the work
done is 27.73p[Delta]v inch-tons, or

  (7)     [Delta]E = 2.31 p[Delta]v foot-tons;

and the differences [Delta]E being calculated from the observed values of
p, a summation, as in the ballistic tables, would give E in a tabular form,
and conversely from a table of E in terms of v, we can infer the value of
p.

On drawing off a little of the gas from the explosion vessel it was found
that a gramme of cordite-gas at 0° C. and standard atmospheric pressure
occupied 700 ccs., while the same gas compressed into 5 ccs. at the
temperature of explosion had a pressure of 16 tons per sq. in., or 16 ×
2240 / 14.7 = 2440 atmospheres, of 14.7 lb per sq. in.; one ton per sq. in.
being in round numbers 150 atmospheres.

The absolute centigrade temperature T is thence inferred from the gas
equation

  (8)     R = pv / T = p_0v_0/273,

which, with p = 2440, v = 5, p_0 = 1, v_0 = 700, makes T = 4758, a
temperature of 4485° C. or 8105° F.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

In the heading of the 6-in. range table we find the description of the
charge.

Charge: weight 13 lb 4 oz.; gravimetric density 55.01/0.504; nature,
cordite, size 30.

So that P = 13.25, the G.D. = 0.504, the upper figure 55.01 denoting the
specific volume of the charge measured in cubic inches per lb, filling the
chamber in a state of gas, the product of the two numbers 55.01 and 0.504
being 27.73; and the chamber capacity C = 13.25 × 55.01 = 730 cub. in.,
equivalent to 25.8 in. or 2.15 ft. length of bore, now called the
equivalent length of the chamber (E.L.C.).

If the shot was not free to move, the closed chamber pressure due to the
explosion of the charge at this G.D. (= 0.5) would be nearly 49 tons per
sq. in., much too great to be safe.

But the shot advances during the combustion of the cordite, and the chief
problem in interior ballistics is to adjust the G.D. of the charge to the
weight of the shot so that the advance of the shot during the combustion of
the charge should prevent the maximum pressure from exceeding a safe limit,
as shown by the maximum ordinate of the pressure curve CPD in fig. 3.

Suppose this limit is fixed at 16 tons per sq. in., corresponding in Table
1. to a G.D., 0.2; the powder-gas will now occupy a volume b = 3/2 × C =
1825 cub. in., corresponding to an advance of the shot 3/2 × 2.15 = 3.225
ft.

Assuming an average pressure of 8 tons per sq. in., the shot will have
acquired energy 8 × ¼[pi]d^2 × 3.225 = 730 foot-tons, and a velocity about
v = 1020 f/s, so that the time over the 3.225 ft. at an average velocity
510 f/s is about 0.0063 sec.

Comparing this time with the experimental value of the time occupied by the
cordite in burning, a start is made for a fresh estimate and a closer
approximation.

Assuming, however, that the agreement is close enough for practical
requirement, the combustion of the cordite may be considered complete at
this stage P, and in the subsequent expansion it is assumed that the gas
obeys an adiabatic law in which the pressure varies inversely as some
m^{th} power of the volume.

The work done in expanding to infinity from p tons per sq. in. [v.03
p.0278] at volume b cub. in. is then pb/(m - 1) inch-tons, or to any volume
B cub. in. is

  (9)     pb/{m - 1}[1 - (b/B)^{m-1}]

It is found experimentally that m = 1.2 is a good average value to take for
cordite; so now supposing the combustion of the charge of the 6-in. is
complete in 0.0063 sec., when p = 16 tons per sq. in., b = 1825 cub. in.,
and that the gas expands adiabatically up to the muzzle, where

  (10)     B/b = (216 + 25.8)/(2.5 × 25.8) = 3.75

we find the work realized by expansion is 2826 foot-tons, sufficient to
increase the velocity from 1020 to 2250 f/s at the muzzle.

This muzzle velocity is about 5% greater than the 2150 f/s of the range
table, so on these considerations we may suppose about 10% of work is lost
by friction in the bore: this is expressed by saying that the _factor of
effect_ is f = 0.9.

The experimental determination of the time of burning under the influence
of the varying pressure and density, and the size of the grain, is thus of
great practical importance, as thereby it is possible to estimate close
limits to the maximum pressure that will be reached in the bore of a gun,
and to design the chamber so that the G.D. of the charge may be suitable
for the weight and acceleration of the shot. Empirical formulas based on
practical experience are employed for an approximation to the result.

A great change has come over interior ballistics in recent years, as the
old black gunpowder has been abandoned in artillery after holding the field
for six hundred years. It is replaced by modern explosives such as those
indicated on fig. 4, capable of giving off a very much larger volume of gas
at a greater temperature and pressure, more than threefold as seen on fig.
8, so that the charge may be reduced in proportion, and possessing the
military advantage of being nearly smokeless. (See EXPLOSIVES.)

The explosive cordite is adopted in the British service; it derives the
name from its appearance as cord in short lengths, the composition being
squeezed in a viscous state through the hole in a die, and the cordite is
designated in size by the number of hundredths of an inch in the diameter
of the hole. Thus the cordite, size 30, of the range table has been
squeezed through a hole 0.30 in. diameter.

The thermochemical properties of the constituents of an explosive will
assign an upper limit to the volume, temperature and pressure of the gas
produced by the combustion; but much experiment is required in addition.
Sir Andrew Noble has published some of his results in the _Phil. Trans._,
1905-1906 and following years.

AUTHORITIES.--Tartaglia, _Nova Scientia_ (1537); Galileo (1638); Robins,
_New Principles of Gunnery_ (1743); Euler (trans. by Hugh Brown), _The True
Principles of Gunnery_ (1777); Didion, Hélie, Hugoniot, Vallier, Baills,
&c., _Balistique_ (French); Siacci, _Balistica_ (Italian); Mayevski,
Zabudski, _Balistique_ (Russian); La Llave, Ollero, Mata, &c., _Balistica_
(Spanish); Bashforth, _The Motion of Projectiles_ (1872); _The Bashforth
Chronograph_ (1890); Ingalls, _Exterior and Interior Ballistics, Handbook
of Problems in Direct and Indirect Fire_; Bruff, _Ordnance and Gunnery_;
Cranz, _Compendium der Ballistik_ (1898); _The Official Text-Book of
Gunnery_ (1902); Charbonnier, _Balistique_ (1905); Lissak, _Ordnance and
Gunnery_ (1907).

(A. G. G.)