BALSAM (from Gr. [Greek: balsamon], through Lat. _balsamum_, contracted by
popular use to O. Fr. _basme_, mod. Fr. _bâme_; Eng. balm), a term properly
limited to such resins or oleo-resins as contain benzoic acid or cinnamic
acid or both. Those balsams which conform to this definition make up a
distinct class, allied to each other by their composition, properties and
uses. Those found in commerce are the balsam of Peru, balsam of Tolu,
liquid storax and liquidambar. _Balsam of Peru_ is the produce of a lofty
leguminous tree, _Myroxylon Pereirae_, growing within a limited area in San
Salvador, Central America and introduced into Ceylon. It is a thick, viscid
oleo-resin of a deep brown or black colour and a fragrant balsamic odour.
It is used in perfumery. Though contained in the pharmacopeias it has no
special medicinal virtues. _Balsam of Tolu_ is produced from _Myroxylon
toluiferum_. It is of a brown colour, thicker than Peru balsam, and attains
a considerable degree of solidity on keeping. It also is a product of
equatorial America, but is found over a much wider area than is the balsam
of Peru. It is used in perfumery and as a constituent in cough syrups and
lozenges. _Liquid storax_ or _styrax preparatus_, is a balsam yielded by
_Liquidambar orientalis_, a native of Asia Minor. It is a soft resinous
substance, with a pleasing balsamic odour, especially after it [v.03
p.0285] has been kept for some time. It is used in medicine as an external
application in some parasitic skin diseases, and internally as an
expectorant. An analogous substance is derived from _Liquidambar Altingia_
in Java. _Liquidambar balsam_ is derived from _Liquidambar styraciflua_, a
tree found in the United States and Mexico. It contains cinnamic acid, but
not benzoic acid.

Of so-called balsams, entirely destitute of cinnamic and benzoic
constituents, the following are found in commerce:--_Mecca balsam_ or _Balm
of Gilead_, from _Commiphora opobalsamum_, a tree growing in Arabia and
Abyssinia, is supposed to be the balm of Scripture and the [Greek:
balsamon] of Theophrastus. When fresh it is a viscid fluid, with a
penetrating odour, but it solidifies with age. It was regarded with the
utmost esteem among the nations of antiquity and to the present day it is
peculiarly prized among the people of the East. For _balsam of copaiba_ see
COPAIBA. Under the name of _wood oil_, or _Gurjun balsam_, an oleo-resin is
procured in India and the Eastern Archipelago from several species of
_Dipterocarpus_, chiefly _D. turbinatus_, which has the odour and
properties of copaiba and has been used for the same purposes. Wood oil is
also used as a varnish in India and forms an effective protection against
the attacks of white ants. _Canada balsam_ or _Canada turpentine_ is the
oleo-resin yielded by _Abies balsamea_, a tree that grows in Canada and the
northern parts of the United States. It is a very transparent substance,
somewhat fluid when first run, but thickening considerably with age,
possessed of a delicate yellow colour and a mild terebinthous odour. It
contains 24% of essential oil, 60% of resin soluble in alcohol, and 16% of
resin soluble only in ether. Its chief uses are for mounting preparations
for the microscope and as a cement for glass in optical work.

The garden balsam is an annual plant, _Impatiens balsamina_, and the balsam
apple is the fruit of _Momordica balsamina_, nat. order Cucurbitaceae.