BALUZE, ÉTIENNE (1630-1718), French scholar, was born at Tulle on the 24th
of November 1630. He was educated at his native town and took minor orders.
As secretary to Pierre de Marca, archbishop of Toulouse, he won the
appreciation of that learned prelate to such a degree that at his death
Marca left him all his papers. Thus it came about that Baluze produced the
first complete edition of Marca's treatise _De libertatibus Ecclesiae
Gallicanae_ (1663), and brought out his _Marca hispanica_ (1688 f.). About
1667 Baluze entered Colbert's service, and until 1700 was in charge of the
invaluable library belonging to that minister and to his son the marquis de
Seignelai. He enriched it prodigiously (see the history of the Colbertine
library in the _Cabinet des Manuscrits_ by M. Léopold Delisle, vol. i.),
and Colbert rewarded him by obtaining various benefices for him, and the
post of king's almoner (1679). Subsequently Baluze was appointed professor
of Canon law at the Collège de France on the 31st of December 1689, and
directed that great institution from 1707 to 1710.

The works which place him in the first rank of the scholars of his time are
the _Capitularia Regum Francorum_ (1674; new edition enlarged and corrected
in 1780); the _Nova Collectio Conciliorum_ (4 vols., 1677); the
_Miscellanea_ (7 vols., 1678-1715; new edition revised by Mansi, 4 vols.
f., 1761-1764); the _Letters of Pope Innocent III._ (1682); and, finally,
the _Vitae Paparum Avenionensium, 1305-1394_ (1693). But he was unfortunate
enough to take up the history of Auvergne just at the time when the
cardinal de Bouillon, inheritor of the rights, and above all of the
ambitious pretensions of the La Tour family, was endeavouring to prove the
descent of that house in the direct line from the ancient hereditary counts
of Auvergne of the 9th century.

As authentic documents in support of these pretensions could not be found,
false ones were fabricated. The production of spurious genealogies had
already been begun in the _Histoire de la maison d'Auvergne_ published by
Christophe Justel in 1645; and Chorier, the historian of Dauphiny, had
included in the second volume of his history (1672) a forged deed which
connected the La Tours of Dauphiny with the La Tours of Auvergne. Next a
regular manufactory of forged documents was organized by a certain Jean de
Bar, an intimate companion of the cardinal. These rogues were skilful
enough, for they succeeded in duping the most illustrious scholars; Dom
Jean Mabillon, the founder of Diplomatics, Dom Thierry Ruinart and Baluze
himself, called as experts, made a unanimously favourable report on the
23rd of July 1695. But cardinal de Bouillon had many enemies, and a war of
pamphlets began. In March 1698 Baluze in reply wrote a _Letter_ which
proved nothing. Two years later, in 1700, Jean de Bar and his accomplices
were arrested, and after a long and searching inquiry were declared guilty
in 1704. Baluze, nevertheless, was obstinate in his opinion. He was
convinced that the incriminated documents were genuine and proposed to do
Justel's work anew. Encouraged and financially supported by the cardinal de
Bouillon, he first produced a _Table généalogique_ in 1705, and then in
1709 a _Histoire généalogique de la maison d'Auvergne_, with "Proofs,"
among which, unfortunately, we find all the deeds which had been pronounced
spurious. In the following year he was suddenly engulfed in the disgrace
which overtook his intriguing patron: deprived of his appointments,
pensions and benefices, he was exiled far from Paris. None the less he
continued to work, and in 1717 published a history of his native town,
_Historiae Tutelensis libri tres_. Before his death he succeeded in
returning to Paris, where he died unconvinced of his errors on the 28th of
July 1718. Was he dupe or accomplice? The study of his correspondence with
the cardinal gives the impression that he was the victim of clever cheats.

The history of the forgeries committed in the interests of the house of
Bouillon forms a curious and instructive episode in the history of French
scholarship in the time of Louis XIV. It is to be found in the _Manuel de
diplomatique_ by A. Giry; and above all in a note to the _Oeuvres de
Saint-Simon_ by M. de Boislisle (vol. xiv. pp. 533-558). The bibliography
of Baluze's researches has been made by M. René Fage (1882, 1884) and his
_Life_ told by M. Émile Fage (1899). To these we must add an amusing book
by G. Clément-Simon, _La Gaieté de Baluze; documents biographiques et
littéraires_ [v.03 p.0297] (1888). Baluze's will has been published by M.
Léopold Delisle (_Bibliothèque de l'École de Chartes_, 1872); his papers
are now in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, and in the Bibliothèque de
l'Arsenal (_Revue historique_, t. xcviii. p. 309). See also the article by
Arthur de Boislisle in the _Revue des questions historiques_ for October
1908.

(C. B.*)