BALUCHISTAN, a province of Persia consisting of the western part of
Baluchistan (_q.v._) in a wider sense. Persian Baluchistan has an area of
about 60,000 sq. m., and lying along the northern shore of the Arabian Sea,
is bounded E. by British and [v.03 p.0296] independent Baluchistan, N. by
Seistan and the central Persian desert, and W. by Kerman. The country has
little water and only a small part of it is under cultivation, the
remainder being composed of arid, waterless plains, deserts--some stony,
others with moving sands--barren hills and mountains. The principal rivers
are the Mashkid and that of Bampur which flow away from the sea and are
lost in depressions called _hamuns_. The rivers which flow into the sea are
unimportant and dry during the greater part of the year. Persian
Baluchistan forms an administrative division of the province of Kerman and
is subdivided into the following twenty districts:--(1) Bampur; (2) Serhad;
(3) Dizek; (4) Jalk; (5) Sib; (6) Irafshan; (7) Magas; (8) Serbaz; (9)
Lashar; (10) Champ; (11) Fannuj; (12) Bazman; (13) Aptar; (14) Daman; (15)
Aprandagan; (16) Asfehgeh; (17) Surmij; (18) Meskutan; (19) Pushteh; (20)
Makran, the country of the Ichthyophagi, with the subdistricts Kasrkand,
Geh, Bint, Dasht, Kucheh and Bahu. The total population of Baluchistan is
under 200,000. The province was practically independent until the
occupation of Bampur by Persian troops in 1849, and over some of the
extreme eastern districts Persian supremacy was not recognized until 1872.