BALZAC, HONORÉ DE (1799-1850), French novelist, was born at Tours on the
20th of May 1799. His father, Bernard François, never called himself _de_
Balzac and Honoré only assumed the particle after 1830. But the father had
equally little right to the name of Balzac at all, for his
birth-certificate has been recently discovered. The true name was "Balssa,"
and this in various forms ("Balsa," "Balsas") has been traced for more than
a century before the novelist's birth as that of a family of day-labourers
or very small peasant proprietors in the parish of Canezac, department of
the Tarn. It is probable that the novelist himself was not aware of this,
and his father appears to have practised some mystification as to his own
professional career. In and after the Revolution, however, he actually
attained positions of some importance in the commissariat and hospital
departments of the army, and he married in 1797 Anne Charlotte Laure
Sallambier, who was a beauty, an heiress, and a woman of considerable
faculty. She survived her son; the father died in 1829. There were two
sisters (the elder, Laure, afterwards Madame Surville, was her brother's
favourite and later his biographer), and a younger brother, Henri, of whom
we hear little and that little not very favourable.

Honoré was put out to nurse till he was four years old, and in 1806, when
he was seven, was sent to the _collège_ (grammar school) of Vendôme, where
he remained till April 1813 as a strict boarder without any holidays. From
this he passed as a day-boy to the _collège_ of Tours. His father's
official work was transferred to Paris the year after, and Balzac came
under the teaching of a royalist private schoolmaster, M. Lepitre, and
others. He left school altogether in 1816, being then between seventeen and
eighteen. His experiences at Vendôme served as base for much of _Louis
Lambert_, and he seems to have been frequently in disgrace. Later, his
teachers appear to have found him remarkable neither for good nor for evil.
He was indeed never a scholar; but he must have read a good deal, and as he
certainly had no time for it later, much of this reading must have been
done early.

The profession which Balzac's father chose for him was the law; and he not
only passed through the schools thereof, and duly obtained his _licence_,
but had three years' practical experience in the offices of a notary and a
solicitor (_avoué_), for the latter of whom, M. Guillonnet-Merville, he
seems to have had a sincere respect. But though no man of letters has ever
had, in some ways, such a fancy for business, no man of business could ever
come out of such a born man of letters. And when in 1820 (the _licence_
having been obtained and M. Balzac, senior, having had some losses) the
father wished the son to become a practising lawyer in one or another
branch, Honoré revolted. His family had left Paris, and they tried to
starve him into submission by establishing him in a garret with a very
small allowance. Here he began to write tragedies, corresponded (in letters
which have fortunately been preserved) with his sister Laure, and, most
important of all, attempted something in prose fiction. The tragedy
_Cromwell_ was actually completed and read to friends if not to others; nay
more, the manuscript exists in the hands of M. Spoelberch de Lovenjoul, the
great authority on Balzac's life and bibliography; but it has never been
published. The novels, _Cocqsigrue_ and _Stella_, proved abortions, but
were only the first of many attempts at his true way until he found it.
Drama he never abandoned; but for him it was always an error.

The garret-period from 1820 to 1822 was succeeded by another of equal
length at home, but before it had finished (1821) he found his way into
print with the first of the singular productions which (and that not
entirely or finally) have taken a sort of outside place in his works under
the title of _Oeuvres de jeunesse_. The _incunabula_ of Balzac were _Les
Deux Hector, ou Les Deux Families bretonnes_, and _Charles Pointel, ou Mon
Cousin de la main gauche_. They were followed next year by six
others:--_L'Héritière de Birague_; _Jean Louis, ou La Fille trouvée_;
_Clotilde de Lusignan, ou Le Beau Juif_; _Le Centenaire, ou Les Deux
Beringheld_; _Le Vicaire des Ardennes_; _Le Tartare, ou Le Retour de
l'exilé_. And these were again followed up in 1823 by three more: _La
Dernière Fée, ou La Nouvelle Lampe merveilleuse_; _Michel et Christine et
la suite_; _L'Anonyme, ou Ni père ni mère_. In 1824 came _Annette et le
criminel_, a continuation of the _Vicaire_; in 1825, _Wann-Chlore_, which
afterwards took the less extravagant title of _Jane la pâle_. These novels,
which filled some two score volumes originally, were published under divers
pseudonyms ("Lord R'hoone," an anagram of "Honoré," "Horace de Saint
Aubin," &c.), and in actual collaboration with two or three other writers.
But though there is not yet in them anything more than the faintest dawn of
the true Balzac, though no one of them is good as a whole, and very few
parts deserve that word except with much qualification, they deserve far
more study than they have usually received, and it is difficult to
apprehend the true Balzac until they have been studied. They ceased for a
time, not because of the author's conviction of their badness (though he
entertained no serious delusions on this subject), nor because they failed
of a certain success in actual money return, but because he had taken to
the earliest, the most prolonged, and the most disastrous of his dabblings
in business--this time as a publisher to some extent and still more as a
printer and type-founder. Not very much was known about his experiences in
this way (except their general failure, and the result in hampering him
with a load of debt directly for some ten years and indirectly for the
whole of his life) till in 1903 MM. Hanotaux and Vicaire published the
results of their inquiries into the actual accounts of the concern. There
seems to have been no reason why it should not have succeeded, and there
has been claimed for it first, that it provided Balzac with a great amount
of actual detail which he utilized directly in the novels, and secondly,
that it gave him at whatever cost a still more valuable experience of
practical life--the experience which has so often been wanting to men of
letters. Anyhow, from 1825 to 1828, the future author of the _Comédie
humaine_ was a publisher, printer and type-founder; and in the last year he
had to abscond, or something like it, under pressure of debts which were
never fully settled till 1838, and then by a further obligation of ninety
thousand francs, chiefly furnished by his mother and never repaid to her.

It was Balzac's habit throughout his life to relieve the double pressure of
debt and of work by frequent excursions into the country and abroad. On
this occasion he fled to Brittany with an introduction to a M. and Mme. de
Pommereul, who received him hospitably in their château near Fougères. Here
he obtained some of the direct material, and most of the scenery and
atmosphere, for what he himself recognized as his first serious attempt in
novel-writing, _Les Chouans_, or, as it was at first called, _Le Dernier
Chouan_. This book (obviously written in direct following of Scott, of whom
Balzac was a lifelong admirer) has been very variously judged--those who
lay most stress on his realism thinking little of it, while those who
maintain that he was always a romantic "with a difference" place it higher.
It has at any rate brilliant colouring, some very vivid scenes, and almost
more passion as well as "curtain" at its ending than any other of his
books. Though not without a touch of melodrama it differs utterly from the
confused and tedious imitations of Mrs Radcliffe, M. G. Lewis and C. R.
Maturin which fill most of the _Oeuvres de jeunesse_. At the same time
Balzac was engaged on a very different work, the analytic-satirical
sketches which compose the _Physiologie du mariage_, and which illustrate
his other and non-romantic side, again with some crudity, but again also
with a vast advance on his earlier productions. Both were published in the
year 1829, from which his real literary career unquestionably starts. It
had exactly twenty-one years to run.

The history of these twenty-one years, though (in consequence mainly of the
diligence and luck as a collector of the above-named M. de Lovenjoul) the
materials for it are large and constantly accumulating, has never been
arranged in a really standard biography, and there seems to be an
increasing habit of concentrating the attention on parts of it. It divides
itself under three heads mainly, the history of Balzac's business affairs,
that [v.03 p.0298] of his loves and friendships and that of his actual
work. The first has some small resemblance to Scott's similar experiences,
though in Balzac's case there was no great crash but a lifelong pressure;
on the other hand, his debts were brought upon him by a long course not so
much of extravagance in actual expenditure (though there was something of
this) as of financial irregularities of almost every
description,--anticipations of earnings, costly methods of production (he
practically wrote his novels on a succession of printed revises),
speculations, travel, and lastly the collection of curiosities. As regards
the second, although his fashion of life made him by turns a hermit and a
vagrant, he was on good terms with most of the famous men of letters of his
day from Hugo downwards, and seems never to have quarrelled with any man,
except with some of his editors and publishers, by his own fault. Balzac
was indeed, in no belittling sense of the word, one of the most
good-natured of men of genius. But his friendships with the other sex are
of much more importance, and not in the least matters of mere gossip. His
sister Laure, as has been said, and a school-friend of hers, Mme Zulma
Carraud, played important and not questionable parts as his correspondents.
But at least three ladies, all of a rank higher than his own, figure as his
"Egerias" to such an extent that it is hardly extravagant to say that
Balzac would not have been Balzac without them. These are Madame de Berny,
a lady connected with the court of the _ancien régime_, much older than
himself and the mother of nine children, to whom he was introduced in 1821,
who became to him _La dilecta_, who was the original of Mme de Mortsauf in
_Le Lys dans la vallée_, and who seems to have exercised an excellent
influence on him in matters of taste till her death in 1836; the marquise
de Castries, who took him up for a time and dropped him, and who has been
supposed to have been his model for his less impeccable ladies of fashion;
and lastly, the Polish-Russian countess Evelina Hanska, who after
addressing, as _l'Étrangère_, a letter to him as early as 1832, became his
idol, rarely seen but constantly corresponded with, for the last eighteen
years, and his wife for the last few months of his life. Some of his
letters to her have long been known, but the bulk of them constituted the
greatest recent addition to our knowledge of him as given in the two
volumes of _Lettres à l'étrangère_. Of hers we have practically none and it
is exceedingly hard to form any clear idea of her, but his devotion is
absolutely beyond question.

Business, friendship and love, however, much more other things, were in
Balzac's case always connected with and on the whole quite secondary to
work. He would even sometimes resist the commands by which at long
intervals Mme. Hanska would summon him to see her, and abstract the greater
part of his actual visits to her in order to serve this still more
absorbing mistress. He had, as we have seen, worked pretty hard, even
before 1829, and his work had partly taken forms not yet
mentioned--political pamphlets and miscellaneous articles which are now
accessible in the _Édition définitive_ of his works, and hardly one of
which is irrelevant to a just conception of him. Nor did he by any means
abandon these by-works after 1829; indeed, he at one time started and
almost entirely wrote, a periodical called the _Revue parisienne_. He wrote
some dramas and planned many more, though the few which reached the stage
left it again promptly. Balzac's dramas, as they appear in his works,
consist of _Vautrin, Les Ressources de Quinola, Paméla Giraud_ (arranged
for the stage by others), _La Marâtre_ and _Mercadet le faiseur_, the last
of which has, since his death, been not unsuccessful. But on the whole he
did devote himself to his true vocation, with a furious energy beside which
even Scott's, except in his sadder and later days, becomes leisurely.
Balzac generally wrote (dining early and lightly, and sleeping for some
hours immediately after dinner) from midnight till any hour in the
following day--stretches of sixteen hours being not unknown, and the
process being often continued for days and weeks. Besides his habit of
correcting a small printed original into a long novel on the proofs, he was
always altering and re-shaping his work, even before, in 1842, he carried
out the idea of building it all into one huge structure--the _Comédie
humaine_ with its subdivisions of _Scènes de la vie parisienne, Études
philosophiques, &c._ Much pains have been spent upon this title and
Balzac's intentions in selecting it. But the "Human Comedy," as a
description for mere studies of life as his, will explain itself at once or
else can never be explained.

Of its constituents, however, some account must be given, and this can be
best done through an exact and complete list of the whole work by years,
with such abbreviated notes on the chief constituents as may lead up to a
general critical summary. Of the two capital works of 1829, we have spoken.
1830, the epoch year, saw part (it was not fully published till the next)
of _La Peau de chagrin_, one of the crudest, but according to some
estimates, one of the greatest of the works, full of romantic extravagance
and surplusage, but with an engrossing central idea--the Nemesis of
accomplished desire--powerfully worked out; _La Maison du chat qui pelote_,
a triumph of observation and nature, together with a crowd of things less
in bulk but sometimes of the first excellence--_El Verdugo_, _Étude de
femme_, _La Paix du ménage_, _Le Bal de sceaux_, _La Vendetta_, _Gobseck_,
_Une Double Famille_, _Les Deux Rêves_, _Adieu_, _L'Élixir de longue vie_,
_Sarrazine_, _Une Passion dans le désert_ and _Un Épisode sous la Terreur_.
In 1831, _La Peau de chagrin_ appeared complete, accompanied by _Le
Réquisitionnaire_, _Les Proscrits_, _Le Chef-d'oeuvre inconnu_ (a
masterpiece fortunately not unrecognized), _Jésus Christ en Flandre_ and
_Maître Cornélius_. 1832 gave _Madame Firmiani_, _Le Message_, _Le Colonel
Chabert_ and _Le Curé de Tours_ (two stories of contrasted but
extraordinary excellence), _La Bourse_, _La Femme abandonnée_, _Louis
Lambert_ (autobiographical and philosophic), _La Grenadière_ and _Les
Marana_ (a great favourite with the author). In 1833 appeared _Ferragus,
chef des dévorants_, the first part of _L'Histoire des treize_ (a
collection in the more extravagant romantic manner, very popular at the
time, and since a favourite with some, but few, good judges), _Le Médecin
de campagne_ (another pet of the author's, and a kind of intended document
of his ability to support the cause of virtue, but, despite certain great
things, especially a wonderful popular "legend of Napoleon," a little heavy
as a whole), the universally admitted masterpiece of _Eugénie Grandet_, and
_L'Illustre Gaudissart_ (very amusing). 1833 also saw the beginning of a
remarkable and never finished work-out of his usual scope but exceedingly
powerful in parts--the _Contes drolatiques_, a series of tales of Old
France in Old (or at least Rabelaisian) French, which were to have been a
hundred in number but never got beyond the third batch of ten. They often
borrow the licence of their 15th and 16th century models; but in _La
Succube_ and others there is undoubted genius and not a little art. 1834
continued the _Treize_ with _La Duchesse de Langeais_ and added _La
Recherche de l'absolu_ (one of Balzac's great studies of monomania, and
thought by some to be the greatest, though others prefer _Le Chef-d'oeuvre
inconnu_), _La Femme de trente ans_ (the chief example of the author's
caprice for re-handling, and very differently judged as a whole), with yet
another of the acknowledged triumphs, _Le Père Goriot_. On the whole, this
year's work, though not the author's largest, is perhaps his most unique.
Next year (1835) followed _Melmoth réconcilié_ (a tribute to the great
influence which Maturin exercised, not over Balzac only, at this time in
France), _Un Drame au bord de la mer_, the brilliant, if questionable,
conclusion of _Les Treize_, _La Fille aux yeux d'or_, _Le Contrat de
mariage_ and _Séraphita_. This last, a Swedenborgian rhapsody of great
beauty in parts, has divided critics almost more than anything else of its
writer's, some seeing in it (with excuse) nothing but the short description
given above in three words, the others (with justice) reckoning it his
greatest triumph of style and his nearest attempt to reach poetry through
prose. 1836 furnished _La Messe de l'athée_, _Interdiction_, _Facino Cane_,
_Le Lys dans la vallée_ (already referred to and of a somewhat sickly
sweetness), _L'Enfant maudit_, _La Vieille Fille_ and _Le Secret des
Ruggieri_ (connected with the earlier _Les deux Rêves_ under the general
title, _Sur Cathérine de Médicis_, and said to have been turned out by
Balzac in a single night, which is hardly possible). In 1837 were published
_Les Deux Poètes_, destined to form part of _Illusions perdues_, _Les
Employés_, _Gambara_ and another capital work, _Histoire de la grandeur et
de la décadence [v.03 p.0299] de César Birotteau_, where Balzac's own
unlucky experiences in trade are made thoroughly matter of art. 1838 was
less fruitful, contributing only _Le Cabinet des antiques_, which had made
an earlier partial appearance, _La Maison Nucingen_ and _Une Fille d'Ève_.
But 1839 made amends with the second part of _Illusions perdues_, _Un Grand
Homme de province à Paris_ (one of Balzac's minor diploma-pieces), _Le Curé
de village_ (a very considerable thing), and two smaller stories, _Les
Secrets de la princesse de Cadignan_ and _Massimilla Doni_. _Pierrette_,
_Z. Marcas_, _Un Prince de la Bohème_ and _Pierre Grassou_ followed in
1840, and in 1841 _Une Ténébreuse Affaire_ (one of his most remarkable
workings-up of the minor facts of actual history), _Le Martyr Calviniste_
(the conclusion of _Sur Cathérine de Médicis_), _Ursule Mirouet_ (an
admirable story), _La Fausse Maîtresse_ and _Mémoires de deux jeunes
mariées_, on which again there have been very different opinions. 1842
supplied _Albert Savarus_ (autobiographical largely), _Un Début dans la
vie_, the very variously named and often rehandled _Rabouilleuse_ (which,
since Taine's exaltation of it, has often been taken as a Balzacian
quintessence), and _Autre étude de femme_, yet another rehandling of
earlier work. In 1843 came the introduction of the completed _Sur Cathérine
de Médicis_, _Honorine_ and _La Muse du département_ (almost as often
reconstructed as _La Femme de trente ans_), with _Comment aiment les jeunes
filles_ (a similar rehandling intended to start the collected _Splendeurs
et misères des courtisanes_), and a further instalment of _Illusions
perdues_, _Les Souffrances d'un inventeur_. Three out of the next four
years were astonishingly fruitful. 1844 gave _Modeste Mignon_ (a book with
a place to itself, and said to be founded on a story actually written by
Madame Hanska), _Gaudissart II._, _A combien l'amour revient aux
vieillards_ (a second part of the _Splendeurs_), _Béatrix_ (one of the most
powerful if not of the most agreeable), and the first and very promising
part of _Les Paysans_. Only _Un Homme d'affaires_ came out in 1845, but
this was made up in 1846 by _Les Comédiens sans le savoir_ (sketched
earlier), another part of the _Splendeurs_, _Où mènent les mauvais
chemins_, the first part of _Les Parents pauvres_, _La Cousine Bette_
(sometimes considered the topmost achievement of Balzac's genius), and the
final form of a work first issued fifteen years earlier and often
retouched, _Petites misères de la vie conjugale_. 1847 was even richer,
with _Le Cousin Pons_ (the second part of _Les Parents pauvres_, and again
a masterpiece), the conclusion of the _Splendeurs_, _La Dernière
Incarnation de Vautrin_, _L'Envers de l'histoire contemporaine_ (which had
been on and off the stocks for five years), and the unfinished _Député
d'Arcis_. This was the last scene of the comedy that appeared in the life
of its author. The conclusion of the _Député d'Arcis_, published in 1853,
and those of _Les Paysans_ and _Les Petits Bourgeois_ which appeared, the
first in this year, the second wholly in 1855, are believed or known to be
by Balzac's friend, Charles Rabou (1803-1871).

This immense and varied total stands to its author in a somewhat different
relation from that of any other work to any other writer. It has been well
said that the whole of Balzac's production was always in his head together;
and this is the main justification for his syllabus of it as the "Comedy."
Some part never came out of his head into print; we have numerous titles of
work (sometimes spoken of in his letters as more or less finished) of which
no trace remains, or only fragmentary MS. sketches. One apparently
considerable book, _La Bataille_, which was to be devoted to the battle of
Essling, and for which he actually visited the ground, is frequently
referred to as in progress from the time of his early letters to Madame
Hanska onwards; but it has never been found. Another result of this
relation was the constant altering, re-shaping, re-connecting of the
different parts. That if Balzac had lived as long as Hugo, and had
preserved his faculties as well, he could never have finished the
_Comédie_, is of course obvious: the life of Methuselah, with the powers of
Shakespeare, would not suffice for that. But that he never would--even if
by some impossibility he could--is almost equally certain. Whether there is
any mark of decline in his latest work has been disputed, but there could
hardly have been farther advance, and the character of the whole, not easy
to define, is much less hard to comprehend, if prejudice be kept out of the
way. That character was put early, but finally, by Victor Hugo in his
funeral discourse on Balzac, whose work he declared, with unusual
terseness, among other phrases of more or less gorgeous rhetoric, to be
"observation and imagination." It may be doubted whether all the volumes
written on Balzac (a reasoned catalogue of the best of which will be found
below) have ever said more than these three words, or have ever said it
more truly if the due stress be laid upon the "and." On the other side,
most of the mistakes about him have arisen from laying undue stress on one
of the two qualities, or from considering them separately rather than as
inextricably mixed and blended. It is this blending which gives him his
unique position. He is an observer of the most exact, the most minute, the
most elaborate; but he suffuses this observation with so strange and
constant an imaginative quality that he is, to some careful and experienced
critics, never quite "real"--or almost always something more than real. He
seems accustomed to create in a fashion which is not so much of the actual
world as of some other, possible but not actual--no matter whether he deals
with money or with love, with Paris or with the provinces, with old times
or with new. A further puzzle has arisen from the fact that though Balzac
has virtuous characters, he sees humanity on the whole "in black": and
that, whether he actually prefers the delineation of vice, misfortune,
failure, or not, he produces as a rule in his readers the sensation
familiarly described as "uncomfortable." His morality has been fiercely
attacked and valiantly defended, but it is absolutely certain that he wrote
with no immoral intention, and with no indifference to morality. In the
same way there has been much discussion of his style, which seldom achieves
beauty, and sometimes falls short of correctness, but which still more
seldom lacks force and adequacy to his own purpose. On the whole, to write
with the shorthand necessary here, it is idle to claim for Balzac an
absolute supremacy in the novel, while it may be questioned whether any
single book of his, or any scene of a book, or even any single character or
situation, is among the very greatest books, scenes, characters, situations
in literature. But no novelist has created on the same scale, with the same
range; none has such a cosmos of his own, pervaded with such a sense of the
originality and power of its creator.

Balzac's life during these twenty years of strenuous production has, as
regards the production itself, been already outlined, but its outward
events, its distractions or avocations--apart from that almost weekly
process of "raising the wind," of settling old debts by contracting new
ones, which seems to have taken up no small part of it--must now be shortly
dealt with. Besides constant visits to the Margonne family at Sache in
Touraine, and to the Carrauds at Frapesle in Berry, he travelled frequently
in France. He went in 1833 to Neuchatel for his first meeting with Madame
Hanska, to Geneva later for his second, and to Vienna in 1835 for his
third. He took at least two flights to Italy, in more or less curious
circumstances. In 1838, he went on a journey to Sardinia to make his
fortune by melting the silver out of the slag-heaps of Roman mines--a
project, it seems, actually feasible and actually accomplished, but in
which he was anticipated. The year before, tired of Paris apartments, he
had bought ground at Ville d'Avray, and there constructed, certainly at
great, though perhaps exaggerated expense, his villa of Les Jardies, which
figures largely in the Balzacian legend. His rash and complicated literary
engagements, and (it must be added) his disregard of them when the whim
took him, brought him into frequent legal difficulties, the most serious of
which was a law-suit with the _Revue de Paris_ in 1836. In 1831, and again
in 1834, he had thought of standing for election as Deputy, and in the
latter year he actually did so both at Cambrai and Angoulême; but it is not
certain that he received any votes. He also more than once took steps to
become a candidate for the Academy, but retired on several occasions before
the voting, and when at last, in 1849, he actually stood, he only obtained
two votes.

As early as the Genevan meeting of 1833, Madame Hanska had formally
promised to marry Balzac in the case of her husband's [v.03 p.0300] death,
and this occurred at the end of 1841. She would not, however, allow him
even to visit her till the next year had expired, and then, though he
travelled to St Petersburg and the engagement was renewed after a fashion,
its fulfilment was indefinitely postponed. For some years Balzac met his
beloved at Baden, Wiesbaden, Brussels, Paris, Rome and elsewhere. Only in
September 1847 was he invited on the definite footing of her future husband
to her estate of Wierzschovnia in the Ukraine; and even then the visit,
interrupted by one excursion to Paris and back, was prolonged for more than
two years before (on the 14th of March 1850) the wedding actually took
place. But Balzac's own _Peau de chagrin_ was now reduced to its last
morsel. His health, weakened by his enormous labours, had been ruined by
the Russian cold and his journeyings across Europe. The pair reached the
house at Paris in the rue Fortunée, which Balzac had bought for his wife
and filled with his collections, at the end of May. On Sunday, the 17th of
August, Victor Hugo found Balzac dying, attended by his mother, but not by
his wife. He actually died at half-past eleven that night and was buried on
the 20th, the pall-bearers being Hugo himself, Dumas, Sainte-Beuve (an
enemy, but in this case a generous one) and the statesman Baroche, in Père
La Chaise, where Hugo delivered the speech cited above.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The extraordinarily complicated bibliography of Balzac will
be found all but complete in the _Histoire des oeuvres_ (1875 and later),
attached by M. Spoelberch de Lovenjoul to the _Édition définitive_, and
supplemented by him in numerous smaller works, _Autour de Balzac_, _Une
Page perdue de Balzac_, &c. Summaries of it will be found appended to the
introductory critical notices of each volume of the English translation
edited by Saintsbury (London, 1895-1898), which also contains a short
Memoir and general criticism. Before the _Édition définitive_ (1869
onwards), the works had been issued during the author's life in various
forms and instalments, the earliest _Comédie humaine_ being of 1842 to 1846
in sixteen volumes. For many years, however, the edition best known was
that referred to in Browning as "all Balzac's novels fifty volumes long,"
really fifty-five small and closely printed 24mos kept stereotyped with
varying dates by Michel (Calmann) Lévy, which did not contain the
miscellaneous works and was not arranged according to the author's last
disposition, but did include the _Oeuvres de jeunesse_. These were not
reprinted in the _Édition définitive_, but this gives the miscellaneous
works in four volumes, an invaluable volume of correspondence, and the
_Histoire des oeuvres_ as cited. To this was added, in 1893, another
volume, _Répertoire des oeuvres de Balzac_, in which the history of the
various personages of the _Comédie_ is tracked throughout and ranged under
separate articles by MM. Cerfbeer and Christophe with extraordinary pains,
and with a result of usefulness which should have protected it from some
critical sneers. In 1899 appeared, as the first volume of _Oeuvres
posthumes_, an instalment of the _Lettres à l'étrangère_, and in 1906 a
second (up to 1844) with a portrait of Madame Hanska, and other
illustrations.

Works on Balzac are very numerous, and some of them are of much importance.
Sainte-Beuve and Balzac fell out, and a furious diatribe by the novelist on
the critic is preserved; but the latter's postmortem examination in
_Causeries du lundi_, vol. ii., is not unfair, though it could hardly be
cordial. Gautier, who was a very intimate and trusty friend of Balzac, has
left an excellent study, mainly personal, reprinted in his _Portraits
contemporains_. Lamartine produced a volume, not of much value, on Balzac
in 1866; and minor contemporaries--Gozlan, Lemer, Champfleury--supplied
something. But the series of important studies of Balzac, based on the
whole of his work and not biased by friendship or enmity, begins with
Taine's Essay of 1858, reprinted in volume form, 1865. Even then the
_Oeuvres diverses_ were accessible only by immense labour in the scattered
originals, and the invaluable _Correspondance_ not at all. It was not till
the reunion of all in the _Édition définitive_ was completed, that full
study of man and work was possible. To this edition itself was attached a
sort of official critical introduction, _L'Oeuvre de Balzac_, by M. Marcel
Barrière (1890). But this is largely occupied by elaborate analyses of the
different books, and the purely critical part is small, and not of the
first value. Better are M. Paul Flat's _Essais sur Balzac_ (2 vols.,
1893-1894), which busy themselves especially with tracing types of
character. Important and new biographical details (including the proper
spelling of the name) were given in M. Edmond Biré's _Honoré de Balzac_
(1897). The _Balzac ignoré_ of A. Cabanes (1899) is chiefly remarkable for
its investigations of Balzac's fancy for occult studies, and the first part
(_Balzac imprimeur_) of MM. Hanotaux and Vicaire's _La Jeunesse de Balzac_
(1903) mentioned above, for its dealing with the printing business and the
intimacy with Madame de Berny. Two most important studies of Balzac in
French, are those of M. A. Le Breton, _Balzac, l'homme et l'oeuvre_ (1905),
a somewhat severe, but critical and very well-informed examination, and M.
Ferdinand Brunetière's _Honoré de Balzac_ (1906), a brilliant but rather
one-sided panegyric on the subject as the evolver of the modern novel
proper, and a realist and observer _par excellence_. In English,
translations of separate books are innumerable; of the whole, besides that
mentioned above, but containing a few things there omitted, an American
version by Miss Wormeley and others may be mentioned. The most elaborate
monograph in English, till recently, was F. Wedmore's _Balzac_ (1887), with
a useful bibliography up to the time. The recent additions to our knowledge
are utilized in Miss Mary F. Sandars' _Balzac_ (1904), a rather popular,
but full and readable summary, chiefly of the life, from all but the latest
documents, and W. H. Helm's _Aspects of Balzac_ (1905), which is critical
as well as anecdotic. The present writer, besides the critical and
biographical essays referred to above, prefixed a shorter one to a
translation of _Les Chouans_ executed by himself in 1890.

(G. SA.)