BAMPTON, JOHN (_c._ 1690-1751), English divine, was a member of Trinity
College, Oxford, where he graduated M.A. in 1712, and for some time canon
of Salisbury. He died on the 2nd of June 1751, aged 61. His will directs
that eight lectures shall be delivered annually at Oxford in the University
Church on as many Sunday mornings in full term, "between the commencement
of the last month in Lent term and the end of the third week in Act term,
upon either of the following subjects:--to confirm and establish the
Christian faith, and to confute all heretics and schismatics; upon the
divine authority of the Holy Scriptures; upon the authority of the writings
of the primitive fathers, as to the faith and practice of the primitive
Church; upon the divinity of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; upon the
divinity of the Holy Ghost; upon the articles of the Christian faith as
comprehended in the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds." The lecturer, who must be
at least a Master of Arts of Oxford or Cambridge, was formerly chosen
yearly by the heads of colleges, on the fourth Tuesday in Easter term, and
no one can be chosen a second time. The series of lectures began in 1780,
and is still continued, though since 1895 elections are only made in
alternate years through a depreciation of the revenue of the fund. The
endowment provides £120 for each lecturer, and the lectures have to be
published within two months of their delivery. Among the lecturers have
been Heber in 1815 (_The Personality and Office of the Christian
Comforter_); R. Whately in 1822 (_Party Feeling in Religion_); R. D.
Hampden in 1832 (_The Scholastic Philosophy in relation to Christian
Theology_); E. M. Goulburn in 1850 (_The Resurrection of the Body_); H. L.
Mansel in 1858 (_The Limits of Religious Thought_); H. P. Liddon in 1866
(_The Divinity of our Lord_); E. Hatch in 1880 (_The Organization of the
Early Christian Churches_); C. Bigg in 1886 (_Christian Platonists of
Alexandria_); C. Gore in 1891 (_The Incarnation_); W. Sanday in 1893
(_Inspiration_); J. R. Illingworth in 1894 (_Personality, Human and
Divine_); W. R. Inge in 1899 (_Christian Mysticism_), &c. A complete list
is given in the _Oxford Historical Register_. The institution has done much
to preserve a high standard in English theology; and the lectures as a
whole form a historically interesting collection of apologetic literature.