BANDINI, ANGELO MARIA (1726-1800), Italian author, was born at Florence on
the 25th of September 1726. Having been left an orphan in his infancy, he
was supported by his uncle, Giuseppe Bandini, a lawyer of some note. He
received his education among the Jesuits, and showed a special inclination
for the study of antiquities. His first work was a dissertation, _De
Veterum Saltationibus_ (1749). In 1747 he undertook a journey to Vienna, in
company with the bishop of Volterra, to whom he acted in the capacity of
secretary. He was introduced to the emperor and took the opportunity of
dedicating to that monarch his _Specimen Litteraturae Florentinae_, which
was then printing at Florence. On his return he took orders, and settled at
Rome, passing the whole of his time in the library of the Vatican, and in
those of the cardinals Passionei and Corsini. The famous obelisk [v.03
p.0312] of Augustus, at that time disinterred from the ruins of the Campus
Martius, was described by Bandini in a learned folio volume _De Obelisco
Augusti_. Shortly after he was compelled to leave Rome on account of his
health and returned to Florence, where he was appointed librarian to the
valuable library bequeathed to the public by the abbé Marucelli. In 1756 he
was preferred by the emperor to a prebend at Florence, and appointed
principal librarian to the Laurentian library. During forty-four years he
continued to discharge the duties of this situation, and died in 1800,
generally esteemed and regretted. On his deathbed he founded a public
school, and bequeathed the remainder of his fortune to other charitable
purposes. The most important of his numerous works are the _Catalogus Codd.
MSS. Graec., Lat., Ital., Bib., Laurent_., 8 vols (1767-1778), and the
_Vita e Lettere d'Amerigo Vespucci_, 1745.