BANDER ABB[=A]SI (also BENDER ABBAS, and other forms), a town of Persia, on
the northern shore of the Persian Gulf in 27° 11' N., and 56° 17' E.,
forming part of the administrative division of the "Persian Gulf ports,"
whose governor resides at Bushire. It has a population of about 10,000, an
insalubrious climate and bad water.

Bander Abb[=a]si was called Gombrun (Gombroon, Gamaroon; Cambarão, Comorão
of Portuguese writers) until 1622, when it received its present name (the
"port of Abbas") in honour of the reigning shah, Abbas I., who had expelled
the Portuguese in 1614, and destroyed the fort built by them in 1612. The
English, however, were permitted to build a factory there, and about 1620
the Dutch obtained the same privilege. On the capture of the island of
Hormuz (Ormus) in 1622 by the English and Persians a large portion of its
trade was transferred to Bander Abb[=a]si. During the remainder of the 17th
century the traffic was considerable, but in the 18th prosperity declined
and most of the trade was removed to Bushire. In 1759 the English factory
was destroyed by the French, and though afterwards re-established it has
long been abandoned. The ruins of the factory and other buildings lie west
of the present town. About 1740 Nadir Shah granted the town and district
with the fort of Shamil and the town of Min[=a]b, together with the islands
of Kishm, Hormuz (Ormus) and L[=a]rak, to the Arab tribe of the Beni
Ma`[=i]ni in return for a payment of a yearly rent or tribute. About 40
years later Sultan bin Ahmad, the ruler of Muscat, having been appealed to
for aid by the Arab inhabitants of the place against Persian misrule,
occupied the town, and obtained a firman from the Persian government
confirming him in his possession on the condition of his paying a yearly
rent of a few thousand tomans. The islands were considered to be the
property of Muscat. In 1852 the Persians expelled the Muscat authorities
from Bander Abb[=a]si and its district, but retired when Muscat agreed to
pay an increased rent. By a treaty concluded between Persia and Muscat in
1856 it was stipulated that Bander Abb[=a]si town and district and the
islands were to be considered Persian territory and leased to Muscat at an
annual rent of 14,000 tomans (£6000). The treaty was to have been in force
for twenty years, but in 1866 the Persians took advantage of the
assassination of Seyed Thuweini, the sultan of Muscat, to instal as
governor of Bander Abb[=a]si and district a nominee of their own who agreed
to pay a rent of 20,000 tomans per annum. Further difficulties arising
between Persia and Muscat, and the ruler of the latter, then in possession
of a powerful fleet, threatening to blockade Bander Abb[=a]si, the Persian
government solicited the good offices of the British government, and the
lease was renewed for another eight years upon payment of 30,000 tomans per
annum (then about £12,000). This was in 1868. In the same year, however,
the sultan of Muscat was expelled by a successful revolt, and the Persian
government, in virtue of a clause in the lease allowing them to cancel the
contract if a conqueror obtained possession of Muscat, installed their own
governor at Bander Abb[=a]si and [v.03 p.0311] have retained possession of
the place ever since (see Curzon, _Persia_, ii. 424).

Bander Abb[=a]si has a lively trade, exporting much of the produce of
central and south-eastern Persia and supplying imports to those districts
and Khorasan. It has telegraph and post offices, and the mail steamers of
the British India Steam Navigation Company call at the port weekly. Great
Britain and Russia are represented there by consuls. From 1890-1905 the
total value of the exports and imports from and into Bander Abb[=a]si
averaged about £660,000 per annum, £260,000 (£155,000 British) being for
exports, £400,000 (£340,000 British) imports. Of the 255,000 tons of
shipping which in 1905 entered Bander Abb[=a]si 237,000 were British.

(A. H.-S.)