BANDELLO, MATTEO (1480-1562), Italian novelist, was born at Castelnuovo,
near Tortona, about the year 1480. He received a very careful education,
and entered the church, though he does not seem to have prosecuted his
theological course with great zeal. For many years he resided at Mantua,
and superintended the education of the celebrated Lucrezia Gonzaga, in
whose honour he composed a long poem. The decisive battle of Pavia, which
gave Lombardy into the hands of the emperor, compelled Bandello to fly; his
house at Milan was burnt and his property confiscated. He took refuge with
Cesare Fregoso, an Italian general in the French service, whom he
accompanied into France. In 1550 he was raised to the bishopric of Agen, a
town in which he resided for many years before his death in 1562. Bandello
wrote a number of poems, but his fame rests entirely upon his extensive
collection of _Novelle_, or tales (1554, 1573), which have been extremely
popular. They belong to that species of literature of which Boccaccio's
_Decameron_ and the queen of Navarre's _Heptameron_ are, perhaps, the best
known examples. The common origin of them all is to be found in the old
French _fabliaux_, though some well-known tales are evidently Eastern, and
others classical. Bandello's novels are esteemed the best of those written
in imitation of the _Decameron_, though Italian critics find fault with
them for negligence and inelegance of style. They have little value from a
purely literary point of view, and many of them are disfigured by the
grossest obscenity. Historically, however, they are of no little interest,
not only from the insight into the social life of the period which they
afford, but from the important influence they exercised on the Elizabethan
drama. The stories on which Shakespeare based several of his plays were
supplied by Bandello, probably through Belleforest or Paynter.