BANGOR (formerly BANGOR FAWR, as distinguished from several other towns of
this name in Wales, Ireland, Brittany, &c.), a city, municipal (1883) and
contributory parliamentary borough (Carnarvon district), seaport and
market-town of Carnarvonshire, N. Wales, 240 m. N.W. of London by the
London & North Western railway. Pop. (1901) 11,269. It consists of Upper
and Lower, the Lower practically one street. Lying near the northern
entrance of the Menai Straits, it attracts many visitors. Buildings include
the small cathedral, disused bishop's palace, deanery, small Roman Catholic
church and other churches, the University College of N. Wales (1883), with
female students' hall, Independent, Baptist, Normal and N. Wales Training
Colleges. The cruciform cathedral, with a low pinnacled tower, stands on
the site of a church which the English destroyed in 1071 (dedicated to, and
perhaps founded, about 525, by St Deiniol). Sir G. Scott restored the
present cathedral, 1866-1875, after it had been burned in the time of Owen
Glendower, destroyed in 1211, and, in 1102 and 1212, severely handled.
Bishop Dean (_temp_. Henry VII.) rebuilt the choir, Bishop Skevyngton
(1532) added tower and nave. Lord Penrhyn's slate-quarries, at Bethesda, 6
m. off, supply the staple export from Port Penrhyn, at the mouth of the
stream Cegid.

The _Myvyrian Archaeology_ (408-484) gives the three principal _bangor_
(college) institutions as follows:--the _bangor_ of Illtud Farchawg at Caer
Worgorn (Wroxeter); that of Emrys (Ambrosius) at Caer Caradawg; _bangor
wydrin_ (glass) in the _glass isle_, Afallach; _bangor Illtud_, or
Llanilltud, or Llantwit major (by corruption), being a fourth. In each of
the first three were 420 saints, succeeding each other (by hundreds), day
and night, in their pious offices.