ATHOLL, EARLS AND DUKES OF. The Stewart line of the Scottish earls of
Atholl, which ended with the 5th Stewart earl in 1595, the earldom
reverting to the crown, had originated with Sir John Stewart of Balveny
(d. 1512), who was created earl of Atholl about 1457 (new charter 1481).
The 5th earl's daughter, Dorothea, married William Murray, earl of
Tullibardine (cr. 1606), who in 1626 resigned his earldom in favour of
Sir Patrick Murray, on condition of the revival of the earldom of Atholl
in his wife and her descendants. The earldom thus passed to the Murray
line, and John Murray, their only son (d. 1642), was accordingly
acknowledged as earl of Atholl (the 1st of the Murrays) in 1629.

JOHN STEWART, 4th earl of Atholl, in the Stewart line (d. 1579), son of
John, 3rd earl, and of Grizel, daughter of Sir John Rattray, succeeded
his father in 1542. He supported the government of the queen dowager,
and in 1560 was one of the three nobles who voted in parliament against
the Reformation and the Confession of Faith, and declared their
adherence to Roman Catholicism. Subsequently, however, he joined the
league against Huntly, whom with Murray and Morton he defeated at
Corrichie in October 1562, and he supported the projected marriage of
Elizabeth with Arran. On the arrival of Mary from France in 1561 he was
appointed one of the twelve privy councillors, and on account of his
religion obtained a greater share of the queen's favour than either
Murray or Maitland. He was one of the principal supporters of the
marriage with Darnley, became the leader of the Roman Catholic nobles,
and with Lennox obtained the chief power in the government, successfully
protecting Mary and Darnley from Murray's attempts to regain his
ascendancy by force of arms. According to Knox he openly attended mass
in the queen's chapel, and was especially trusted by Mary in her project
of reinstating Roman Catholicism. The fortress of Tantallon was placed
in his keeping, and in 1565 he was made lieutenant of the north of
Scotland. He is described the same year by the French ambassador as
"très grand catholique hardi et vaillant et remuant, comme l'on dict,
mais de nul jugement et expérience." He had no share in the murders of
Rizzio or Darnley, and after the latter crime in 1567, he joined the
Protestant lords against Mary, appeared as one of the leaders against
her at Carberry Hill, and afterwards approved of her imprisonment at
Lochleven Castle. In July he was present at the coronation of James, and
was included in the council of regency on Mary's abdication. He,
however, was not present at Langside in May 1568, and in July became
once more a supporter of Mary, voting for her divorce from Bothwell
(1569). In March 1570 he signed with other lords the joint letter to
Elizabeth asking for the queen's intercession and supporting Mary's
claims, and was present at the convention held at Linlithgow in April in
opposition to the assembly of the king's party at Edinburgh. In 1574 he
was proceeded against as a Roman Catholic and threatened with
excommunication, subsequently holding a conference with the ministers
and being allowed till midsummer to overcome his scruples. He had failed
in 1572 to prevent Morton's appointment to the regency, but in 1578 he
succeeded with the earl of Argyll in driving him from office. On the
24th of March James took the government into his own hands and dissolved
the regency, and Atholl and Argyll, to the exclusion of Morton, were
made members of the council, while on the 29th Atholl was appointed lord
chancellor. Subsequently, on the 24th of May, Morton succeeded in
getting into Stirling Castle and in regaining his guardianship of James.
Atholl and Argyll, who were now corresponding with Spain in hopes of
assistance from that quarter, then advanced to Stirling with a force of
7000 men, when a compromise was arranged, the three earls being all
included in the government. While on his way from a banquet held on the
20th of April 1579 on the occasion of the reconciliation, Atholl was
seized with sudden illness, and died on the 25th, not without strong
suspicions of poison. He was buried at St. Giles's cathedral in
Edinburgh. He married (1) Elizabeth, daughter of George Gordon, 4th earl
of Huntly, by whom he had two daughters, and (2) Margaret, daughter of
Malcolm Fleming, 3rd Lord Fleming, by whom, besides three daughters, he
had John, 5th earl of Atholl, at whose death in 1595 the earldom in
default of male heirs reverted to the crown.

JOHN MURRAY, 1st earl of Atholl in the Murray line (see above), died in
1642. On the outbreak of the civil war he called out the men of Atholl
for the king, and was imprisoned by the marquess of Argyll in Stirling
Castle in 1640.

JOHN MURRAY, 2nd earl and 1st marquess of Atholl (1631-1703), son of the
1st earl and of Jean, daughter of Sir Duncan Campbell of Glenorchy, was
born on the 2nd of May 1631. In 1650 he joined in the unsuccessful
attempt to liberate Charles II. from the Covenanters, and in 1653 was
the chief supporter of Glencairn's rising, but was obliged to surrender
with his two regiments to Monk on the 2nd of September 1654. At the
restoration Atholl was made a privy councillor for Scotland and sheriff
of Fife, in 1661 lord justice-general of Scotland, in 1667 a
commissioner for keeping the peace in the western Highlands, in 1670
colonel of the king's horseguards, in 1671 a commissioner of the
exchequer, and in 1672 keeper of the privy seal in Scotland and an
extraordinary lord of session. In 1670 he became earl of Tullibardine by
the death of his cousin James, 4th earl, and on the 7th of February 1676
he was created marquess of Atholl, earl of Tullibardine, viscount of
Balquhidder, Lord Murray, Balvenie and Cask. He at first zealously
supported Lauderdale's tyrannical policy, but after the raid of 1678,
called the "Highland Host," in which Atholl was one of the chief
leaders, he joined in the remonstrance to the king concerning the
severities inflicted upon the Covenanters, and was deprived of his
office of justice-general and passed over for the chancellorship in
1681. In 1679, however, he was present at the battle of Bothwell Brig;
in July 1680 he was made vice-admiral of Scotland, and in 1681 president
of parliament. In 1684 he was appointed lord-lieutenant of Argyll, and
invaded the country, capturing the earl of Argyll after his return from
abroad in June 1685 at Inchinnan. The excessive severities with which he
was charged in this campaign were repudiated with some success by him
after the Revolution.[1] The same year he was reappointed lord privy
seal, and in 1687 was made a knight of the Thistle on the revival of the
order. At the Revolution he wavered from one side to the other, showing
no settled purpose but waiting upon the event, but finally in April 1689
wrote to William to declare his allegiance, and in May took part in the
proclamation of William and Mary as king and queen at Edinburgh. But on
the occasion of Dundee's insurrection he retired to Bath to drink the
waters, while the bulk of his followers joined Dundee and brought about
in great measure the defeat of the government troops at Killiecrankie.
He was then summoned from Bath to London and imprisoned during August.
In 1690 he was implicated in the Montgomery plot and subsequently in
further Jacobite intrigues. In June 1691 he received a pardon, and acted
later for the government in the pacification of the Highlands. He died
on the 6th of May 1703. He married Amelia, daughter of James Stanley,
7th earl of Derby (through whom the later dukes of Atholl acquired the
sovereignty of the Isle of Man), and had, besides one daughter, six
sons, of whom John became 2nd marquess and 1st duke of Atholl; Charles
was made 1st earl of Dunmore, and William married Margaret, daughter of
Sir Robert Nairne, 1st Lord Nairne, becoming in her right 2nd Lord
Nairne.

JOHN MURRAY, 2nd marquess and 1st duke of Atholl (1660-1724), was born
on the 24th of February 1660, and was styled during his father's
lifetime Lord Murray, till 1696, when he was created earl of
Tullibardine. He was a supporter of William and the Revolution in 1688,
taking the oaths in September 1689, but was unable to prevent the
majority of his clan, during his father's absence, from joining Dundee
under the command of his brother James. In 1693 as one of the
commissioners he showed great energy in the examination into the
massacre of Glencoe and in bringing the crime home to its authors. In
1694 he obtained a regiment, in 1695 was made sheriff of Perth, in 1696
secretary of state, and from 1696 to 1698 was high commissioner. In the
latter year, however, he threw up office and went into opposition. At
the accession of Anne he was made a privy councillor, and in 1703 lord
privy seal for Scotland. The same year he succeeded his father as 2nd
marquess of Atholl, and on the 30th of June he was created duke of
Atholl, marquess of Tullibardine, earl of Strathtay and Strathardle,
Viscount Balquhidder, Glenalmond and Glenlyon, and Lord Murray, Balvenie
and Gask. In 1704 he was made a knight of the Thistle. In 1703-1704 an
unsuccessful attempt was made by Simon, Lord Lovat, who used the duke of
Queensberry as a tool, to implicate him in a Jacobite plot against Queen
Anne; but the intrigue was disclosed by Robert Ferguson, and Atholl sent
a memorial to the queen on the subject, which resulted in Queensberry's
downfall. But he fell nevertheless into suspicion, and was deprived of
office in October 1705, subsequently becoming a strong antagonist of the
government, and of the Hanoverian succession. He vehemently opposed the
Union during the years 1705-1707, and entered into a project for
resisting by force and for holding Stirling Castle with the aid of the
Cameronians, but nevertheless did not refuse a compensation of £1000.
According to Lockhart, he could raise 6000 of the best men in the
kingdom for the Jacobites. On the occasion, however, of the invasion of
1708 he took no part, on the score of illness, and was placed under
arrest at Blair Castle. On the downfall of the Whigs and the advent of
the Tories to power, Atholl returned to office, was chosen a
representative peer in the Lords in 1710 and 1713, in 1712 was an
extraordinary lord of session, from 1713 to 1714 was once more keeper of
the privy seal, and from 1712 to 1714 was high commissioner. On the
accession of George I. he was again dismissed from office, but at the
rebellion of 1715, while three of his sons joined the Jacobites, he
remained faithful to the government, whom he assisted in various ways,
on the 4th of June 1717 apprehending Robert Macgregor (Rob Roy), who,
however, succeeded in escaping. He died on the 14th of November 1724. He
married (1) Catherine, daughter of William Douglas, 3rd duke of
Hamilton, by whom, besides one daughter, he had six sons, of whom John
was killed at Malplaquet in 1709, William was marquess of Tullibardine,
and James succeeded his father as 2nd duke on account of the share
taken by his elder brother in the rebellion; and (2) Mary, daughter of
William, Lord Ross, by whom he had three sons and several daughters.

The _Atholl Chronicles_ have been privately printed by the 7th duke of
Atholl (b. 1840). See also S. Cowan, _Three Celtic Earldoms_ (1909).

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] A. Lang, _Hist. of Scotland_, iii. 407.