ATLANTIC CITY, a city of Atlantic county, New Jersey, U.S.A., on the
Atlantic Ocean, 58 m. S.E. of Philadelphia and 137 m. S. by W. of New
York. Pop. (1890) 13,055; (1900) 27,838, of whom 6513 were of negro
descent and 3189 were foreign-born; (1910 census) 46,150. It is served
by the Atlantic City (Philadelphia & Reading) and the West Jersey &
Seashore (Pennsylvania system) railways. Atlantic City is the largest
and most popular all-the-year-round resort in the United States, and has
numerous fine hotels. The city extends for 3 m. along a low sandy island
(Absecon Beach), 10 m. long by ¾ m. wide, separated from the mainland by
a narrow strip of salt water and 4 or 5 m. of salt marshes, partly
covered with water at highest storm tide. There are good bathing,
boating, sailing, fishing and wild-fowl shooting. A "Board Walk"
stretches along the beach for about 5 m.--the newest part of it is of
concrete--and along or near this walk are the largest hotels, and
numerous shops, and places of amusement; from the walk into the ocean
extend several long piers. Other features of the place are the broad
driveway (Atlantic Avenue) and an automobile boulevard. There are
several seaside sanitoriums and hospitals, including the Atlantic City
hospital, the Mercer Memorial home, and the Children's Seashore home. On
the north end of the beach is Absecon Lighthouse, 160 ft. high. The
municipality owns the water-works. Oysters are dredged here and are
shipped hence in large quantities. There was a settlement of fishermen
on the island in the latter part of the 18th century. In 1852 a movement
was made to develop it as a seaside resort for Philadelphia, and after
the completion of the Camden & Atlantic City railway in 1854 the growth
of the place was rapid. A heavy loss occurred by fire on the 3rd of
April 1902.