ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY. 1. It was not until the middle of the 18th
century that experiments due to Benjamin Franklin showed that the
electric phenomena of the atmosphere are not fundamentally different
from those produced in the laboratory. For the next century the rate of
progress was slow, though the ideas of Volta in Italy and the
instrumental devices of Sir Francis Ronalds in England merit
recognition. The invention of the portable electrometer and the
water-dropping electrograph by Lord Kelvin in the middle of the 19th
century, and the greater definiteness thus introduced into observational
results, were notable events. Towards the end of the 19th century came
the discovery made by W. Linss (6)[1] and by J. Elster and H. Geitel (7)
that even the most perfectly insulated conductors lose their charge, and
that this loss depends on atmospheric conditions. Hard on this came the
recognition of the fact that freely charged positive and negative ions
are always present in the atmosphere, and that a radioactive emanation
can be collected. Whilst no small amount of observational work has been
done in these new branches of atmospheric electricity, the science has
still not developed to a considerable extent beyond preliminary stages.
Observations have usually been limited to a portion of the year, or to a
few hours of the day, whilst the results from different stations differ
much in details. It is thus difficult to form a judgment as to what has
most claim to acceptance as the general law, and what may be regarded as
local or exceptional.

2. _Potential Gradient._--In dry weather the electric potential in the
atmosphere is normally positive relative to the earth, and increases
with the height. The existence of _earth currents_ (q.v.) shows that the
earth, strictly speaking, is not all at one potential, but the natural
differences of potential between points on the earth's surface a mile
apart are insignificant compared to the normal potential difference
between the earth and a point one foot above it. What is aimed at in
ordinary observations of atmospheric potential is the measurement of the
difference of potential between the earth and a point a given distance
above it, or of the difference of potential between two points in the
same vertical line a given distance apart. Let a conductor, say a
metallic sphere, be supported by a metal rod of negligible electric
capacity whose other end is earthed. As the whole conductor must be at
zero (i.e. the earth's) potential, there must be an induced charge on
the sphere, producing at its centre a potential equal but of opposite
sign to what would exist at the same spot in free air. This neglects any
charge in the air displaced by the sphere, and assumes a statical state
of conditions and that the conductor itself exerts no disturbing
influence. Suppose now that the sphere's earth connexion is broken and
that it is carried without loss of charge inside a building at zero
potential. If its potential as observed there is -V (volts), then the
potential of the air at the spot occupied by the sphere was +V. This
method in one shape or another has been often employed. Suppose next
that a fixed insulated conductor is somehow kept at the potential of the
air at a given point, then the measurement of its potential is
equivalent to a measurement of that of the air. This is the basis of a
variety of methods. In the earliest the conductor was represented by
long metal wires, supported by silk or other insulating material, and
left to pick up the air's potential. The addition of sharp points was a
step in advance; but the method hardly became a quantitative one until
the sharp points were replaced by a flame (fuse, gas, lamp), or by a
liquid jet breaking into drops. The matter leaving the conductor,
whether the products of combustion or the drops of a liquid, supplies
the means of securing equality of potential between the conductor and
the air at the spot where the matter quits electrical connexion with the
conductor. Of late years the function of the collector is discharged in
some forms of apparatus by a salt of radium. Of flame collectors the two
best known are Lord Kelvin's portable electrometer with a fuse, or F.
Exner's gold leaf electroscope in conjunction with an oil lamp or gas
flame. Of liquid collectors the representative is Lord Kelvin's
water-dropping electrograph; while Benndorf's is the form of radium
collector that has been most used. It cannot be said that any one form
of collector is superior all round. Flame collectors blow out in high
winds, whilst water-droppers are apt to get frozen in winter. At first
sight the balance of advantages seems to lie with radium. But while
gaseous products and even falling water are capable of modifying
electrical conditions in their immediate neighbourhood, the "infection"
produced by radium is more insidious, and other drawbacks present
themselves in practice. It requires a radium salt of high radioactivity
to be at all comparable in effectiveness with a good water-dropper.
Experiments by F. Linke (8) indicated that a water-dropper having a
number of fine holes, or having a fine jet under a considerable
pressure, picks up the potential in about a tenth of the time required
by the ordinary radium preparation protected by a glass tube. These fine
jet droppers with a mixture of alcohol and water have proved very
effective for balloon observations.

  TABLE I.--_Annual Variation Potential Gradient._

  +---------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
  | Place and Period.               | Jan.| Feb.|March|April| May | June|July|Aug.|Sept.| Oct.| Nov.| Dec.|
  +---------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
  | Karasjok (10), 1903-1904        | 143 | 150 | 137 |  94 |  74 |  65 | 70 | 67 |  67 |  87 | 120 | 126 |
  | Sodankylä (31), 1882-1883       |  94 | 133 | 148 | 155 | 186 |  93 | 53 | 77 |  47 |  72 |  71 |  71 |
  | Potsdam (9), 1904               | 167 |  95 | 118 |  88 |  93 |  72 | 73 | 65 |  97 | 101 | 108 | 123 |
  | Kew (12), 1898-1904             | 127 | 141 | 113 |  87 |  77 |  70 | 61 | 72 |  76 |  96 | 126 | 153 |
  | Greenwich (13), 1893-1894, 1896 | 110 | 112 | 127 | 107 |  83 |  71 | 76 | 84 |  83 | 104 | 104 | 139 |
  | Florence (14), 1883-1886        | 132 | 110 |  98 |  84 |  86 |  81 | 77 | 90 |  89 |  99 | 129 | 125 |
  | Perpignan (15), 1886-1888       | 121 | 112 | 108 |  89 |  91 |  92 | 89 | 82 |  74 |  99 | 122 | 121 |
  | Lisbon (16), 1884-1886          | 104 | 105 | 104 |  92 |  91 |  93 | 87 | 92 | 100 |  99 | 115 | 117 |
  | Tokyo (17), 1897-1898, 1900-1901| 165 | 145 | 117 |  86 |  62 |  58 | 41 | 59 |  59 |  97 | 134 | 176 |
  | Batavia (18)(2 m.), 1887-1890   |  97 | 115 | 155 | 127 | 129 | 105 | 79 | 62 |  69 |  79 |  90 |  93 |
  |     "     (7.8 m.)  1890-1895   | 100 |  89 | 103 | 120 |  98 | 103 | 85 | 99 |  73 | 101 | 117 | 112 |
  +---------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+----+-----+-----+-----+-----+

3. Before considering observational data, it is expedient to mention
various sources of uncertainty. Above the level plain of absolutely
smooth surface, devoid of houses or vegetation, the equipotential
surfaces under normal conditions would be strictly horizontal, and if we
could determine the potential at one metre above the ground we should
have a definite measure of the potential gradient at the earth's
surface. The presence, however, of apparatus or observers upsets the
conditions, while above uneven ground or near a tree or a building the
equipotential surfaces cease to be horizontal. In an ordinary climate a
building seems to be practically at the earth's potential; near its
walls the equipotential surfaces are highly inclined, and near the
ridges they may lie very close together. The height of the walls in the
various observatories, the height of the collectors, and the distance
they project from the wall vary largely, and sometimes there are
external buildings or trees sufficiently near to influence the
potential. It is thus futile to compare the absolute voltages met with
at two stations, unless allowance can be made for the influence of the
environment. With a view to this, it has become increasingly common of
late years to publish not the voltages actually observed, but values
deduced from them for the potential gradient in the open in volts per
metre. Observations are made at a given height over level open ground
near the observatory, and a comparison with the simultaneous results
from the self-recording electrograph enables the records from the latter
to be expressed as potential gradients in the open. In the case,
however, of many observatories, especially as regards the older records,
no data for reduction exist; further, the reduction to the open is at
best only an approximation, the success attending which probably varies
considerably at different stations. This is one of the reasons why in
the figures for the annual and diurnal variations in Tables I., II. and
III., the potential has been expressed as percentages of its mean value
for the year or the day. In most cases the environment of a collector is
not absolutely invariable. If the shape of the equipotential surfaces
near it is influenced by trees, shrubs or grass, their influence will
vary throughout the year. In winter the varying depth of snow may exert
an appreciable effect. There are sources of uncertainty in the
instrument itself. Unless the insulation is perfect, the potential
recorded falls short of that at the spot where the radium is placed or
the water jet breaks. The action of the collector is opposed by the
leakage through imperfect insulation, or natural dissipation, and this
may introduce a fictitious element into the apparent annual or diurnal
variation. The potentials that have to be dealt with are often hundreds
and sometimes thousands of volts, and insulation troubles are more
serious than is generally appreciated. When a water jet serves as
collector, the pressure under which it issues should be practically
constant. If the pressure alters as the water tank empties, a
discontinuity occurs in the trace when the tank is refilled, and a
fictitious element may be introduced into the diurnal variation. When
rain or snow is falling, the potential frequently changes rapidly. These
changes are often too rapid to be satisfactorily dealt with by an
ordinary electrometer, and they sometimes leave hardly a trace on the
photographic paper. Again rain dripping from exposed parts of the
apparatus may materially affect the record. It is thus customary in
calculating diurnal inequalities either to take no account of days on
which there is an appreciable rainfall, or else to form separate tables
for "dry" or "fine" days and for "all" days. Speaking generally, the
exclusion of days of rain and of negative potential comes pretty much to
the same thing, and the presence or absence of negative potential is not
infrequently the criterion by reference to which days are rejected or
are accepted as normal.

  4. The potential gradient near the ground varies with the season of
  the year and the hour of the day, and is largely dependent on the
  weather conditions. It is thus difficult to form even a rough estimate
  of the mean value at any place unless hourly readings exist, extending
  over the whole or the greater part of a year. It is even somewhat
  precipitate to assume that a mean value deduced from a single year is
  fairly representative of average conditions. At Potsdam, G. Lüdeling
  (9) found for the mean value for 1904 in volts per metre 242. At
  Karasjok in the extreme north of Norway G.C. Simpson (10) in 1903-1904
  obtained 139. At Kremsmünster for 1902 P.B. Zölss(11) gives 98. At Kew
  (12) the mean for individual years from 1898 to 1904 varied from 141
  in 1900 to 179 in 1899, the mean from the seven years combined being
  159. The large difference between the means obtained at Potsdam and
  Kremsmünster, as compared to the comparative similarity between the
  results for Kew and Karasjok, suggests that the mean value of the
  potential gradient may be much more dependent on local conditions than
  on difference of latitude.

  At any single station potential gradient has a wide range of values.
  The largest positive and negative values recorded are met with during
  disturbed weather. During thunderstorms the record from an
  electrograph shows large sudden excursions, the trace usually going
  off the sheet with every flash of lightning when the thunder is near.
  Exactly what the potential changes amount to under such circumstances
  it is impossible to say; what the trace shows depends largely on the
  type of electrometer. Large rapid changes are also met with in the
  absence of thunder during heavy rain or snow fall. In England the
  largest values of a sufficiently steady character to be shown
  correctly by an ordinary electrograph occur during winter fogs. At
  such times gradients of +400 or +500 volts per metre are by no means
  unusual at Kew, and voltages of 700 or 800 are occasionally met with.

  5. Annual Variation.--Table I. gives the annual variation of the
  potential gradient at a number of stations arranged according to
  latitude, the mean value for the whole year being taken in each case
  as 100. Karasjok as already mentioned is in the extreme north of
  Norway (69° 17' N.); Sodankylä was the Finnish station of the
  international polar year 1882-1883. At Batavia, which is near the
  equator (6° 11' S.) the annual variation seems somewhat irregular.
  Further, the results obtained with the water-dropper at two
  heights--viz. 2 and 7.8 metres--differ notably. At all the other
  stalions the difference between summer and winter months is
  conspicuous. From the European data one would be disposed to conclude
  that the variation throughout the year diminishes as one approaches
  the equator. It is decidedly less at Perpignan and Lisbon than at
  Potsdam, Kew and Greenwich, but nowhere is the seasonal difference
  more conspicuous than at Tokyo, which is south of Lisbon.

    TABLE II.--_Diurnal Variation Potential Gradient_.

    +-------+--------+---------+-------------+---------+--------+---------+--------+-------+-------------+---------+
    |Station|Karasjok|Sodankylä| Kew(19, 12).|Greenwich|Florence|Perpignan| Lisbon.| Tokyo.|   Batavia.  |  Cape   |
    |       |        |         |             |         |        |         |        |       |             |Horn(20).|
    +-------+--------+---------+------+------+---------+--------+---------+--------+-------+------+------+---------+
    |Period | 1903-4.| 1882-83 | 1862-| 1898-| 1893-96.|1883-85.| 1886-88.|1884-86.|1897-98| 1887-| 1890-| 1882-83.|
    |       |        |         | 1864.| 1904.|         |        |         |        |1900-1.| 1890.| 1895.|         |
    +-------+--------+---------+------+------+---------+--------+---------+--------+-------+------+------+---------+
    | Days. |        |   All.  | All. |Quiet.|   All.  |  All.  |  Fine.  |  All.  |  All. | Dry. | Dry. |   Pos.  |
    +-------+--------+---------+------+------+---------+--------+---------+--------+-------+------+------+---------+
    |   h   |  5.5   |   3.0   | 3.5  | 3.35 |   3.0   |        |   8.4   |   3.0  |  1.7  |   2  |  7.8 |   3.5   |
    |   l   |        |   2.5   | 1.0  | 1.3  |   1.8   |        |   1.5   |   0.5  |  2.0  |      |  7.8 |   2.0   |
    +-------+--------+---------+------+------+---------+--------+---------+--------+-------+------+------+---------+
    |  Hour |        |         |      |      |         |        |         |        |       |      |      |         |
    |   1   |   83   |    91   |   87 |   93 |    97   |    92  |    78   |    84  |  101  |  147 |  125 |    82   |
    |   2   |   73   |    85   |   79 |   88 |    89   |    83  |    72   |    80  |   98  |  141 |  114 |    73   |
    |   3   |   66   |    82   |   74 |   84 |    87   |    77  |    71   |    78  |   97  |  135 |  109 |    85   |
    |   4   |   63   |    84   |   72 |   83 |    86   |    75  |    72   |    81  |   99  |  128 |  102 |    81   |
    |   5   |   60   |    89   |   71 |   85 |    86   |    74  |    77   |    83  |  121  |  127 |  101 |    85   |
    |   6   |   68   |    91   |   77 |   93 |    92   |    82  |    92   |    92  |  154  |  137 |  117 |    95   |
    |   7   |   81   |    97   |   92 |  103 |   100   |   100  |   107   |   101  |  167  |  158 |  147 |   106   |
    |   8   |   87   |   100   |  106 |  112 |   102   |   112  |   114   |   105  |  149  |  104 |  119 |   118   |
    |   9   |   94   |    98   |  107 |  115 |   100   |   113  |   111   |   104  |  117  |   67 |   82 |   119   |
    |  10   |  101   |   102   |  100 |  112 |   101   |   107  |   100   |   104  |   87  |   42 |   55 |   123   |
    |  11   |   99   |    98   |   90 |  101 |    96   |   100  |    96   |   102  |   70  |   35 |   46 |   123   |
    | Noon. |  103   |   102   |   92 |   94 |    97   |    95  |    99   |   108  |   61  |   30 |   43 |   115   |
    |   1   |  106   |   105   |   90 |   89 |    96   |    92  |    99   |   111  |   54  |   30 |   42 |   112   |
    |   2   |  108   |   107   |   91 |   87 |    94   |    90  |    97   |   114  |   49  |   30 |   43 |    94   |
    |   3   |  108   |   108   |   92 |   88 |    95   |    89  |    99   |   109  |   53  |   33 |   46 |    89   |
    |   4   |  109   |   108   |   98 |   93 |    97   |    89  |   105   |   108  |   61  |   41 |   53 |    88   |
    |   5   |  110   |   108   |  108 |   99 |   102   |    94  |   113   |   108  |   76  |   67 |   73 |    84   |
    |   6   |  119   |   110   |  121 |  108 |   108   |   113  |   126   |   111  |   95  |   91 |  108 |   110   |
    |   7   |  129   |   102   |  134 |  115 |   111   |   121  |   131   |   116  |  107  |  120 |  145 |   107   |
    |   8   |  136   |   111   |  139 |  118 |   115   |   129  |   129   |   114  |  114  |  137 |  155 |   123   |
    |   9   |  139   |   111   |  138 |  119 |   117   |   132  |   120   |   109  |  119  |  146 |  155 |   112   |
    |  10   |  133   |   104   |  128 |  115 |   117   |   127  |   109   |   102  |  120  |  148 |  147 |    99   |
    |  11   |  121   |   108   |  113 |  108 |   111   |   114  |    97   |    92  |  119  |  151 |  143 |    85   |
    |  12   |  102   |    93   |   99 |   99 |   104   |   100  |    86   |    85  |  112  |  147 |  130 |    98   |
    +-------+--------+---------+------+------+---------+--------+---------+--------+-------+------+------+---------+

    TABLE III.--_Diurnal Variation Potential Gradient_.

    +--------+-----------+-----------+-----------------+-----------+-----------+---------+-----------+-----------+
    |Station.| Karasjok. | Sodankylä.|       Kew.      | Greenwich.|  Bureau   | Eiffel  | Perpignan |  Batavia  |
    |        |           |           |                 |           |Central(21)|Tower(21)|   (21).   |  (2 m.)   |
    +--------+-----------+-----------+-----------------+-----------+-----------+---------+-----------+-----------+
    | Period.|  1903-4.  |  1882-83. |    1898-1904.   |1894, 1896.|  1894-99. | 1896-98.|  1885-95. |  1887-90. |
    +--------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+---------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    |        | Win-| Sum-| Win-| Sum-| Win-|Equi-| Sum-| Win-| Sum-| Win-| Sum-| Summer. | Win-| Sum-| Win | Sum-|
    |        | ter.| mer.| ter.| mer.| ter.| nox.| mer.| ter.| mer.| ter.| mer.|         | ter.| mer.| ter.| mer.|
    +--------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+---------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    |  Hour. |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |         |     |     |     |     |
    |    1   |  76 | 104 |  90 |  99 |  91 |  93 |  96 |  87 | 110 |  79 | 102 |    90   |  72 |  88 | 145 | 149 |
    |    2   |  66 |  96 |  79 |  84 |  86 |  88 |  90 |  84 | 101 |  71 |  92 |    83   |  67 |  83 | 139 | 142 |
    |    3   |  57 |  89 |  78 |  90 |  82 |  85 |  85 |  76 |  98 |  70 |  88 |    79   |  66 |  81 | 137 | 135 |
    |    4   |  55 |  83 |  74 |  99 |  81 |  84 |  84 |  77 |  96 |  69 |  84 |    76   |  67 |  83 | 131 | 127 |
    |    5   |  50 |  79 |  74 | 111 |  82 |  87 |  90 |  78 |  94 |  75 |  94 |    78   |  72 |  92 | 132 | 123 |
    |    6   |  61 |  83 |  80 | 114 |  86 |  97 | 101 |  82 | 101 |  83 | 106 |    87   |  84 | 107 | 138 | 136 |
    |    7   |  78 |  89 |  86 | 117 |  95 | 109 | 113 |  94 | 107 |  98 | 118 |    97   | 104 | 114 | 166 | 153 |
    |    8   |  82 |  93 |  95 | 122 | 104 | 118 | 120 |  97 | 111 | 111 | 120 |   103   | 122 | 108 | 118 |  92 |
    |    9   |  90 |  93 |  91 | 109 | 111 | 119 | 119 |  98 | 102 | 113 | 106 |   110   | 126 | 100 |  74 |  64 |
    |   10   | 104 |  93 | 106 | 101 | 114 | 110 | 110 | 102 |  98 | 111 |  94 |   109   | 114 |  93 |  43 |  40 |
    |   11   | 102 |  92 |  98 |  97 | 107 |  95 |  97 | 103 |  86 | 108 |  84 |   107   |  98 |  90 |  35 |  36 |
    |  Noon. | 119 |  90 |  98 | 100 | 102 |  86 |  87 | 107 |  94 | 106 |  77 |   104   |  99 |  95 |  31 |  30 |
    |    1   | 116 |  94 | 116 |  97 |  99 |  81 |  80 | 107 |  85 | 112 |  79 |   107   |  96 |  93 |  29 |  33 |
    |    2   | 118 |  97 | 113 |  97 |  97 |  80 |  76 | 109 |  82 | 112 |  81 |   110   |  94 |  90 |  28 |  32 |
    |    3   | 119 | 100 | 121 |  93 |  99 |  82 |  76 | 111 |  78 | 111 |  78 |   107   |  95 |  88 |  24 |  41 |
    |    4   | 115 |  99 | 111 |  96 | 103 |  88 |  80 | 116 |  81 | 113 |  80 |   105   | 102 |  92 |  30 |  49 |
    |    5   | 120 | 106 | 105 | 106 | 108 |  96 |  87 | 112 |  93 | 120 |  85 |   106   | 115 |  98 |  60 |  74 |
    |    6   | 131 | 104 | 115 |  92 | 111 | 109 |  98 | 114 |  98 | 124 |  97 |   109   | 128 | 110 |  88 |  94 |
    |    7   | 136 | 110 | 118 | 102 | 114 | 120 | 111 | 117 |  99 | 124 | 123 |   113   | 133 | 122 | 119 | 122 |
    |    8   | 134 | 113 | 117 | 106 | 112 | 124 | 123 | 113 | 108 | 116 | 134 |   110   | 131 | 127 | 138 | 135 |
    |    9   | 137 | 125 | 115 |  90 | 111 | 123 | 129 | 111 | 118 | 104 | 130 |   109   | 124 | 125 | 145 | 147 |
    |   10   | 125 | 135 | 112 |  90 | 108 | 118 | 125 | 110 | 124 |  97 | 122 |   105   | 111 | 117 | 148 | 148 |
    |   11   | 114 | 126 | 113 | 103 | 103 | 109 | 116 | 102 | 120 |  90 | 115 |   101   |  96 | 108 | 149 | 152 |
    |   12   |  96 | 111 |  95 |  85 |  96 |  99 | 105 |  93 | 116 |  83 | 108 |    94   |  83 |  95 | 148 | 146 |
    +--------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+---------+-----+-----+-----+-----+

  At the temperate stations the maximum occurs near midwinter; in the
  Arctic it seems deferred towards spring.

  6. _Diurnal Variation._--Table II. gives the mean diurnal variation
  for the whole year at a number of stations arranged in order of
  latitude, the mean from the 24 hourly values being taken as 100. The
  data are some from "all" days, some from "quiet," "fine" or "dry"
  days. The height, h, and the distance from the wall, l, were the
  potential is measured are given in metres when known. In most cases
  two distinct maxima and minima occur in the 24 hours. The principal
  maximum is usually found in the evening between 8 and 10 P.M., the
  principal minimum in the morning from 3 to 5 A.M. At some stations the
  minimum in the afternoon is indistinctly shown, but at Tokyo and
  Batavia it is mu	ch more conspicuous than the morning minimum.

  [Illustration: FIG. 1.]

  7. In Table III. the diurnal inequality is shown for "winter" and
  "summer" respectively. In all cases the mean value for the 24 hours is
  taken as 100. By "summer" is meant April to September at Sodankylä,
  Greenwich and Batavia; May to August at Kew, Bureau Central (Paris),
  Eiffel Tower and Perpignan; and May to July at Karasjok. "Winter"
  includes October to March at Sodankylä, Greenwich and Batavia;
  November to February at Kew and Bureau Central; November to January at
  Karasjok, and December and January at Perpignan. Mean results from
  March, April, September and October at Kew are assigned to "Equinox."

  At Batavia the difference between winter and summer is comparatively
  small. Elsewhere there is a tendency for the double period, usually so
  prominent in summer, to become less pronounced in winter, the
  afternoon minimum tending to disappear. Even in summer the double
  period is not prominent in the arctic climate of Karasjok or on the
  top of the Eiffel Tower. The diurnal variation in summer at the latter
  station is shown graphically in the top curve of fig. 1. It presents a
  remarkable resemblance to the adjacent curve, which gives the diurnal
  variation at mid-winter at the Bureau Central. The resemblance between
  these curves is much closer than that between the Bureau Central's own
  winter and summer curves. All three Paris curves show three peaks, the
  first and third representing the ordinary forenoon and afternoon
  maxima. In summer at the Bureau Central the intermediate peak nearly
  disappears in the profound afternoon depression, but it is still
  recognizable. This three-peaked curve is not wholly peculiar to Paris,
  being seen, for instance, at Lisbon in summer. The December and June
  curves for Kew are good examples of the ordinary nature of the
  difference between midwinter and midsummer. The afternoon minimum at
  Kew gradually deepens as midsummer approaches. Simultaneously the
  forenoon maximum occurs earlier and the afternoon maximum later in the
  day. The two last curves in the diagram contrast the diurnal variation
  at Kew in potential gradient and in barometric pressure for the year
  as a whole. The somewhat remarkable resemblance between the diurnal
  variation for the two elements, first remarked on by J.D. Everett
  (19), is of interest in connexion with recent theoretical conclusions
  by J.P. Elster and H.F.K. Geitel and by H. Ebert.

  In the potential curves of the diagram the ordinates represent the
  hourly values expressed--as in Tables II. and III.--as percentages of
  the mean value for the day. If this be overlooked, a wrong impression
  may be derived as to the absolute amplitudes of the changes. The Kew
  curves, for instance, might suggest that the range (maximum less
  minimum hourly value) was larger in June than in December. In reality
  the December range was 82, the June only 57 volts; but the mean value
  of the potential was 243 in December as against 111 in June. So again,
  in the case of the Paris curves, the absolute value of the diurnal
  range in summer was much greater for the Eiffel Tower than for the
  Bureau Central, but the mean voltage was 2150 at the former station
  and only 134 at the latter.

  8. _Fourier Coefficients._--Diurnal inequalities such as those of
  Tables II. and III. and intended to eliminate irregular changes, but
  they also to some extent eliminate regular changes if the hours of
  maxima and minima or the character of the diurnal variation alter
  throughout the year. The alteration that takes place in the regular
  diurnal inequality throughout the year is best seen by analysing it
  into a Fourier series of the type

    c1 sin(t + a1) + c2 sin(2t + a2) + c3 sin(3t + a3) +
       + c4 sin(4t + a4) + ...

  where t denotes time counted from (local) midnight, c1, c2, c3, c4,
  ... are the amplitudes of the component harmonic waves of periods 24,
  12, 8 and 6 hours; a1, a2, a3, a4, are the corresponding phase angles.
  One hour of time t is counted as 15°, and a delay of one hour in the
  time of maximum answers to a diminution of 15° in a1, of 30° in a2,
  and so on. If a1, say, varies much throughput the year, or if the
  ratios of c2, c3, c4, ... to c1, vary much, then a diurnal inequality
  derived from a whole year, or from a season composed of several
  months, represents a mean curve arising from the superposition of a
  number of curves, which differ in shape and in the positions of their
  maxima and minima. The result, if considered alone, inevitably leads
  to an underestimate of the average amplitude of the regular diurnal
  variation.

  It is also desirable to have an idea of the size of the irregular
  changes which vary from one day to the next. On stormy days, as
  already mentioned, the irregular changes hardly admit of satisfactory
  treatment. Even on the quietest days irregular changes are always
  numerous and often large.

  Table IV. aims at giving a summary of the several phenomena for a
  single station, Kew, on electrically quiet days. The first line gives
  the mean value of the potential gradient, the second the mean excess
  of the largest over the smallest hourly value on individual days. The
  hourly values are derived from smoothed curves, the object being to
  get the mean ordinate for a 60-minute period. If the actual crests of
  the excursions had been measured the figures in the second line would
  have been even larger. The third line gives the range of the _regular_
  diurnal inequality, the next four lines the amplitudes of the first
  four Fourier waves into which the regular diurnal inequality has been
  analysed. These mean values, ranges and amplitudes are all measured in
  volts per metre (in the open). The last four lines of Table IV. give
  the phase angles of the first four Fourier waves.

    TABLE IV.--_Absolute Potential Data at Kew_ (12).

    +--------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    |                                | Jan.| Feb.| Mar.| Apr.| May | June| July| Aug.| Sep.| Oct.| Nov.| Dec.|
    +--------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    | Mean Potential Gradient        | 201 | 224 | 180 | 138 | 123 | 111 |  98 | 114 | 121 | 153 | 200 | 243 |
    | Mean of individual daily ranges| 203 | 218 | 210 | 164 | 143 | 143 | 117 | 129 | 141 | 196 | 186 | 213 |
    | Range in Diurnal inequality    |  73 |  94 |  83 |  74 |  71 |  57 |  55 |  60 |  54 |  63 |  52 |  82 |
    |                           / c1 |  22 |  22 |  17 |  13 |  18 |   9 |   6 |   6 |   9 |   7 |  14 |  30 |
    | Amplitudes of Fourier     | c2 |  21 |  33 |  34 |  31 |  22 |  23 |  24 |  26 |  23 |  30 |  17 |  21 |
    |   waves                  <  c3 |   7 |  10 |   5 |   5 |   3 |   1 |   3 |   2 |   3 |   6 |   5 |   7 |
    |                           \ c4 |   2 |   3 |   5 |   6 |   4 |   1 |   4 |   3 |   4 |   3 |   2 |   3 |
    |                                +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    |                                |  °  |  °  |  °  |  °  |  °  |  °  |  °  |  °  |  °     °  |  °  |  °  |
    |                           / a1 | 206 | 204 | 123 |  72 |  86 |  79 |  48 | 142 | 154 | 192 | 202 | 208 |
    | Phase angles of Fourier   | a1 | 170 | 171 | 186 | 193 | 188 | 183 | 185 | 182 | 199 | 206 | 212 | 175 |
    |  waves                   <  a3 |  11 |   9 |  36 |  96 | 100 | 125 | 124 | 107 |  16 |  18 |  38 |  36 |
    |                           \ a1 | 235 | 225 | 307 | 314 | 314 | 277 | 293 | 313 | 330 | 288 | 238 | 249 |
    +--------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+

  It will be noticed that the difference between the greatest and least
  hourly values is, in all but three winter months, actually larger than
  the mean value of the potential gradient for the day; it bears to the
  range of the regular diurnal inequality a ratio varying from 2.0 in
  May to 3.6 in November.

  At midwinter the 24-hour term is the largest, but near midsummer it is
  small compared to the 12-hour term. The 24-hour term is very variable
  both as regards its amplitude and its phase angle (and so its hour of
  maximum). The 12-hour term is much less variable, especially as
  regards its phase angle; its amplitude shows distinct maxima near the
  equinoxes. That the 8-hour and 6-hour waves, though small near
  midsummer, represent more than mere accidental irregularities, seems a
  safe inference from the regularity apparent in the annual variation of
  their phase angles.

    TABLE V.--_Fourier Series Amplitudes and Phase Angles._

    +------------------+---------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
    |                  |         |         Winter.         |         Summer .        |
    |      Place.      | Period. +------+------+-----+-----+------+------+-----+-----+
    |                  |         |  c1. |  c2. | a1. | a2. |  c1. |  c2. | a1. | a2. |
    +------------------+---------+------+------+-----+-----+------+------+-----+-----+
    |                  |         |      |      |  °  |  °  |      |      |  °  |  °  |
    | Kew              | 1862-64 |0.283 |0.160 | 184 | 193 |0.127 |0.229 | 111 | 179 |
    |  "               |1898-1904| .102 | .103 | 206 | 180 | .079 | .213 |  87 | 186 |
    | Bureau Central   | 1894-98 | .220 | .104 | 223 | 206 | .130 | .200 |  95 | 197 |
    | Eiffel Tower     | 1896-98 |  ..  |  ..  | ..  | ..  | .133 | .085 | 216 | 171 |
    | Sonnblick (22)   | 1902-03 |  ..  |  ..  | ..  | ..  | .208 | .120 | 178 | 145 |
    | Karasjok         | 1903-04 | .356 | .144 | 189 | 155 | .165 | .093 | 141 | 144 |
    | Kremsmünster (23)|  1902   | .280 | .117 | 224 | 194 | .166 | .153 | 241 | 209 |
    | Potsdam          |  1904   | .269 | .101 | 194 | 185 | .096 | .152 | 343 | 185 |
    +------------------+---------+------+------+-----+-----+------+------+-----+-----+

  9. Table V. gives some data for the 24-hour and 12-hour Fourier
  coefficients, which will serve to illustrate the diversity between
  different stations. In this table, unlike Table IV., amplitudes are
  all expressed as decimals of the mean value of the potential gradient
  for the corresponding season. "Winter" means generally the four
  midwinter, and "summer" the four midsummer, months; but at Karasjok
  three, and at Kremsmünster six, months are included in each season.
  The results for the Sonnblick are derived from a comparatively small
  number of days in August and September. At Potsdam the data represent
  the arithmetic means derived from the Fourier analysis for the
  individual months comprising the season. The 1862-1864 data from
  Kew--due to J.D. Everett (19)--are based on "all" days; the others,
  except Karasjok to some extent, represent electrically quiet days. The
  cause of the large difference between the two sets of data for c1 at
  Kew is uncertain. The potential gradient is in all cases lower in
  summer than winter, and thus the reduction in c1 in summer would
  appear even larger than in Table V. if the results were expressed in
  absolute measure. At Karasjok and Kremsmünster the seasonal variation
  in a1 seems comparatively small, but at Potsdam and the Bureau Central
  it is as large as at Kew. Also, whilst the winter values of a1 are
  fairly similar at the several stations the summer values are widely
  different. Except at Karasjok, where the diurnal changes seem somewhat
  irregular, the relative amplitude of the 12-hour term is considerably
  greater in summer than in winter. The values of a2 at the various
  stations differ comparatively little, and show but little seasonal
  change. Thus the 12-hour term has a much greater uniformity than the
  24-hour term. This possesses significance in connexion with the view,
  supported by A.B. Chauveau (21), F. Exner (24) and others, that the
  12-hour term is largely if not entirely a local phenomenon, due to the
  action of the lower atmospheric strata, and tending to disappear even
  in summer at high altitudes. Exner attributes the double daily
  maximum, which is largely a consequence of the 12-hour wave, to a thin
  layer near the ground, which in the early afternoon absorbs the solar
  radiation of shortest wave length. This layer he believes specially
  characteristic of arid dusty regions, while comparatively non-existent
  in moist climates or where foliage is luxuriant. In support of his
  theory Exner states that he has found but little trace of the double
  maximum and minimum in Ceylon and elsewhere. C. Nordmann (25)
  describes some similar results which he obtained in Algeria during
  August and September 1905. His station, Philippeville, is close to the
  shores of the Mediterranean, and sea breezes persisted during the day.
  The diurnal variation showed only a single maximum and minimum,
  between 5 and 6 P.M. and 4 and 5 A.M. respectively. So again, a few
  days' observations on the top of Mont Blanc (4810 metres) by le Cadet
  (26) in August and September 1902, showed only a single period, with
  maximum between 3 and 4 P.M., and minimum about 3 A.M. Chauveau points
  to the reduction in the 12-hour term as compared to the 24-hour term
  on the Eiffel Tower, and infers the practical disappearance of the
  former at no great height. The close approach in the values for c1 in
  Table V. from the Bureau Central and the Eiffel Tower, and the
  reduction of c2 at the latter station, are unquestionably significant
  facts; but the summer value for c2 at Karasjok--a low level
  station--is nearly as small as that at the Eiffel Tower, and notably
  smaller than that at the Sonnblick (3100 metres). Again, Kew is
  surrounded by a large park, not devoid of trees, and hardly the place
  where Exner's theory would suggest a large value for c2, and yet the
  summer value of c2 at Kew is the largest in Table V.

  10. Observations on mountain tops generally show high potentials near
  the ground. This only means that the equipotential surfaces are
  crowded together, just as they are near the ridge of a house. To
  ascertain how the increase in the voltage varies as the height in the
  free atmosphere increases, it is necessary to employ kites or
  balloons. At small heights Exner (27) has employed captive balloons,
  provided with a burning fuse, and carrying a wire connected with an
  electroscope on the ground. He found the gradient nearly uniform for
  heights up to 30 to 40 metres above the ground. At great heights free
  balloons seem necessary. The balloon carries two collectors a given
  vertical distance apart. The potential difference between the two is
  recorded, and the potential gradient is thus found. Some of the
  earliest balloon observations made the gradient increase with the
  height, but such a result is now regarded as abnormal. A balloon may
  leave the earth with a charge, or become charged through discharge of
  ballast. These possibilities may not have been sufficiently realized
  at first. Among the most important balloon observations are those by
  le Cadet (1) F. Linke (28) and H. Gerdien (29). The following are
  samples from a number of days' results, given in le Cadet's book. h is
  the height in metres, P the gradient in volts per metre.

    Aug. 9, 1893  / h  824  830 1060 1255 1290 1745 1940 2080 2310 2520
                  \ P   37   43   43   41   42   34   25   21   18   16

    Sep. 11, 1897 / h 1140 1378 1630 1914 2370 2786 3136 3364 3912 4085
                  \ P   43   38   33   25   22   21   19   19   14   13

  The ground value on the last occasion was 150. From observations
  during twelve balloon ascents, Linke concludes that below the
  1500-metre level there are numerous sources of disturbance, the
  gradient at any given height varying much from day to day and hour to
  hour; but at greater heights there is much more uniformity. At heights
  from 1500 to 6000 metres his observations agreed well with the formula

    dV/dh = 34 - 0.006h,

  V denoting the potential, h the height in metres. The formula makes
  the gradient diminish from 25 volts per metre at 1500 metres height to
  10 volts per metre at 4000 metres. Linke's mean value for dV/dh at the
  ground was 125. Accepting Linke's formula, the potential at 4000
  metres is 43,750 volts higher than at 1500 metres. If the mean of the
  gradients observed at the ground and at 1500 metres be taken as an
  approximation to the mean value of the gradient throughout the lowest
  1500 metres of the atmosphere, we find for the potential at 1500
  metres level 112,500 volts. Thus at 4000 metres the potential seems of
  the order of 150,000 volts. Bearing this in mind, one can readily
  imagine how close together the equipotential surfaces must lie near
  the summit of a high sharp mountain peak.

  11. At most stations a negative potential gradient is exceptional,
  unless during rain or thunder. During rain the potential is usually
  but not always negative, and frequent alternations of sign are not
  uncommon. In some localities, however, negative potential gradient is
  by no means uncommon, at least at some seasons, in the absence of
  rain. At Madras, Michie Smith (30) often observed negative potential
  during bright August and September days. The phenomenon was quite
  common between 9.30 A.M. and noon during westerly winds, which at
  Madras are usually very dry and dusty. At Sodankylä, in 1882-1883,
  K.S. Lemström and F.C. Biese (31) found that out of 255 observed
  occurrences of negative potential, 106 took place in the absence of
  rain or snow. The proportion of occurrences of negative potential
  under a clear sky was much above its average in autumn. At Sodankylä
  rain or snowfall was often unaccompanied by change of sign in the
  potential. At the polar station Godthaab (32) in 1882-1883, negative
  potential seemed sometimes associated with aurora (see AURORA
  POLARIS).

  Lenard, Elster and Geitel, and others have found the potential
  gradient negative near waterfalls, the influence sometimes extending
  to a considerable distance. Lenard (33) found that when pure water
  falls upon water the neighbouring air takes a negative charge. Kelvin,
  Maclean and Gait (34) found the effect greatest in the air near the
  level of impact. A sensible effect remained, however, after the
  influence of splashing was eliminated. Kelvin, Maclean and Galt regard
  this property of falling water as an objection to the use of a
  water-dropper indoors, though not of practical importance when it is
  used out of doors.

  12. Elster and Geitel (35) have measured the charge carried by
  raindrops falling into an insulated vessel. Owing to observational
  difficulties, the exact measure of success attained is a little
  difficult to gauge, but it seems fairly certain that raindrops usually
  carry a charge. Elster and Geitel found the sign of the charge often
  fluctuate repeatedly during a single rain storm, but it seemed more
  often than not opposite to that of the simultaneous potential
  gradient. Gerdien has more recently repeated the experiments,
  employing an apparatus devised by him for the purpose. It has been
  found by C.T.R. Wilson (36) that a vessel in which freshly fallen rain
  or snow has been evaporated to dryness shows radioactive properties
  lasting for a few hours. The results obtained from equal weights of
  rain and snow seem of the same order.

  13. W. Linss (6) found that an insulated conductor charged either
  positively or negatively lost its charge in the free atmosphere; the
  potential V after time t being connected with its initial value V0 by
  a formula of the type V = V0e^(-at) where a is constant. This was
  confirmed by Elster and Geitel (7), whose form of dissipation
  apparatus has been employed in most recent work. The percentage of the
  charge which is dissipated per minute is usually denoted by a+ or a-
  according to its sign. The mean of a+ and a- is usually denoted by a±
  or simply by a, while q is employed for the ratio a-/a+. Some
  observers when giving mean values take [Sigma](a-/a+) as the mean
  value of q, while others take [Sigma](a-)/[Sigma](a+). The Elster
  and Geitel apparatus is furnished with a cover, serving to protect the
  dissipator from the direct action of rain, wind or sunlight. It is
  usual to observe with this cover on, but some observers, e.g. A.
  Gockel, have made long series of observations without it. The loss of
  charge is due to more than one cause, and it is difficult to attribute
  an absolutely definite meaning even to results obtained with the cover
  on. Gockel (37) says that the results he obtained without the cover
  when divided by 3 are fairly comparable with those obtained under the
  usual conditions; but the appropriate divisor must vary to some extent
  with the climatic conditions. Thus results obtained for a+ or a-
  without the cover are of doubtful value for purposes of comparison
  with those found elsewhere with it on. In the case of q the
  uncertainty is much less.

    TABLE VI.--_Dissipation. Mean Values._

    +--------------------------+-------+--------------+---------------------+------+------+
    |           Place.         |Period.|    Season.   |     Observer or     |  a±  |  q   |
    |                          |       |              |      Authority.     |      |      |
    +--------------------------+-------+--------------+---------------------+------+------+
    | Karasjok                 | 1903-4|     Year     | Simpson (10)        | 3.57 | 1.15 |
    | Wolfenbüttel             |             Year     | Elster & Geitel (39)| 1.33 | 1.05 |
    | Potsdam                  |  1904 |     Year     | Lüdeling (40)       | 1.13 | 1.33 |
    | Kremsmüster              |  1902 |     Year     | Zölss (42)          | 1.32 | 1.18 |
    |     "                    |  1903 |     Year     | Zölss (41)          | 1.35 | 1.14 |
    | Freiburg                 |       |     Year     | Gockel (43)         |  ..  | 1.41 |
    | Innsbruck                |  1902 |              | Czermak (44)        | 1.95 | 0.94 |
    |     "                    |  1905 | Jan. to June | Defant (45)         | 1.47 | 1.17 |
    | Mattsee (Salzburg)       |  1905 | July to Sept.| von Schweidler (46) |  ..  | 0.99 |
    | Seewalchen               |  1904 | July to Sept.| von Schweidler (38) |  ..  | 1.18 |
    | Trieste                  | 1902-3|     Year     | Mazelle (47)        | 0.58 | 1.09 |
    | Misdroy                  |  1902 |              | Lüdeling (40)       | 1.09 | 1.58 |
    | Swinemünde               |  1904 |Aug. and Sept.| Lüdeling (40)       | 1.23 | 1.37 |
    | Heligoland (sands)       |  1903 |    Summer    | Elster & Geitel (40)| 1.14 | 1.71 |
    |     "      plateau       |   "   |      "       |    "        "   (40)| 3.07 | 1.50 |
    | Juist (Island)           |       |      "       |    "        "   (48)| 1.56 | 1.56 |
    | Atlantic and German Ocean|  1904 |    August    | Boltzmann (49)      | 1.83 | 2.69 |
    | Arosa (1800 m.)          |  1903 |Feb. to April | Saake (50)          | 1.79 | 1.22 |
    | Rothhorn (2300 m.)       |  1903 |   September  | Gockel (43)         |  ..  | 5.31 |
    | Sonnblick (3100 m.)      |  1903 |   September  | Conrad (22)         |  ..  | 1.75 |
    | Mont Blanc (4810 m.)     |  1902 |   September  | le Cadet (43)       |  ..  |10.3  |
    +--------------------------+-------+--------------+---------------------+------+------+

  Table VI. gives the mean values of a± and q found at various places.
  The observations were usually confined to a few hours of the day, very
  commonly between 11 A.M. and 1 P.M., and in absence of information as
  to the diurnal variation it is impossible to say how much this
  influences the results. The first eight stations lie inland; that at
  Seewalchen (38) was, however, adjacent to a large lake. The next five
  stations are on the coast or on islands. The final four are at high
  levels. In the cases where the observations were confined to a few
  months the representative nature of the results is more doubtful.

  On mountain summits q tends to be large, i.e. a negative charge is
  lost much faster than a positive charge. Apparently q has also a
  tendency to be large near the sea, but this phenomenon is not seen at
  Trieste. An exactly opposite phenomenon, it may be remarked, is seen
  near waterfalls, q becoming very small. Only Innsbruck and Mattsee
  give a mean value of q less than unity. Also, as later observations at
  Innsbruck give more normal values for q, some doubt may be felt as to
  the earlier observations there. The result for Mattsee seems less open
  to doubt, for the observer, von Schweidler, had obtained a normal
  value for q during the previous year at Seewalchen. Whilst the average
  q in at least the great majority of stations exceeds unity, individual
  observations making q less than unity are not rare. Thus in 1902 (51)
  the percentage of cases in which q fell short of 1 was 30 at Trieste,
  33 at Vienna, and 35 at Kremsmünster; at Innsbruck q was less than 1
  on 58 days out of 98.

  In a long series of observations, individual values of q show usually
  a wide range. Thus during observations extending over more than a
  year, q varied from 0.18 to 8.25 at Kremsmünster and from 0.11 to 3.00
  at Trieste. The values of a+, a- and a± also show large variations.
  Thus at Trieste a+ varied from 0.12 to 4.07, and a- from 0.11 to 3.87;
  at Vienna a+ varied from 0.32 to 7.10, and a- from 0.78 to 5.42; at
  Kremsmünster a± varied from 0.14 to 5.83.

  14. _Annual Variation._--When observations are made at irregular
  hours, or at only one or two fixed hours, it is doubtful how
  representative they are. Results obtained at noon, for example,
  probably differ more from the mean value for the 24 hours at one
  season than at another. Most dissipation results are exposed to
  considerable uncertainty on these grounds. Also it requires a long
  series of years to give thoroughly representative results for any
  element, and few stations possess more than a year or two's
  dissipation data. Table VII. gives comparative results for winter
  (October to March) and summer at a few stations, the value for the
  season being the arithmetic mean from the individual months composing
  it. At Karasjok (10), Simpson observed thrice a day; the summer value
  there is nearly double the winter both for a+ and a-. The Kremsmünster
  (42) figures show a smaller but still distinct excess in the summer
  values. At Trieste (47), Mazelle's data from all days of the year show
  no decided seasonal change in a+ or a-; but when days on which the
  wind was high are excluded the summer value is decidedly the higher.
  At Freiburg (43), q seems decidedly larger in winter than in summer;
  at Karasjok and Trieste the seasonal effect in q seems small and
  uncertain.

    TABLE VII.--_Dissipation._

    +--------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
    |                    |           Winter.         |           Summer.         |
    +--------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
    |       Place.       |  a+  |  a-  |  a±  |  q   |  a+  |  a-  |  a±  |  q   |
    +--------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
    | Karasjok 1903-1904 | 2.28 | 2.69 | 2.49 | 1.18 | 4.38 | 4.94 | 4.65 | 1.13 |
    | Kremsmüster 1903   | 1.14 | 1.30 | 1.22 | 1.14 | 1.38 | 1.56 | 1.47 | 1.12 |
    | Freiburg           |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  | 1.57 |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  | 1.26 |
    | Trieste 1902-1903  | 0.56 | 0.59 | 0.58 | 1.07 | 0.55 | 0.61 | 0.58 | 1.13 |
    |   "     calm days  |  ..  |  ..  | 0.35 |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  | 0.48 |  ..  |
    +--------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+

  15. _Diurnal Variation._--P.B. Zölss (41, 42) has published diurnal
  variation data for Kremsmünster for more than one year, and
  independently for midsummer (May to August) and midwinter (December to
  February). His figures show a double daily period in both a+ and a-,
  the principal maximum occurring about 1 or 2 P.M. The two minima
  occur, the one from 5 to 7 A.M., the other from 7 to 8 P.M.; they are
  nearly equal. Taking the figures answering to the whole year, May 1903
  to 1904, a+ varied throughout the day from 0.82 to 1.35, and a- from
  0.85 to 1.47. At midsummer the extreme hourly values were 0.91 and
  1.45 for a+, 0.94 and 1.60 for a-. The corresponding figures at
  midwinter were 0.65 and 1.19 for a+, 0.61 and 1.43 for a-. Zölss' data
  for q show also a double daily period, but the apparent range is
  small, and the hourly variation is somewhat irregular. At Karasjok,
  Simpson found a+ and a- both larger between noon and 1 P.M. than
  between either 8 and 9 A.M. or 6 and 7 P.M. The 6 to 7 P.M. values
  were in general the smallest, especially in the case of a+; the
  evening value for q on the average exceeded the values from the two
  earlier hours by some 7%.

  Summer observations on mountains have shown diurnal variations very
  large and fairly regular, but widely different from those observed at
  lower levels. On the Rothhorn, Gockel (43) found a+ particularly
  variable, the mean 7 A.M. value being 4½ times that at 1 P.M. q (taken
  as [Sigma](a-/a+)) varied from 2.25 at 5 A.M. and 2.52 at 9 P.M. to
  7.82 at 3 P.M. and 8.35 at 7 P.M. On the Sonnblick, in early
  September, V. Conrad (22) found somewhat similar results for q, the
  principal maximum occurring at 1 P.M., with minima at 9 P.M. and 6
  A.M.; the largest hourly value was, however, scarcely double the
  least. Conrad found a- largest at 4 A.M. and least at 6 P.M., the
  largest value being double the least; a+ was largest at 5 A.M. and
  least at 2 P.M., the largest value being fully 2½ times the least. On
  Mont Blanc, le Cadet (43) found q largest from 1 to 3 P.M., the value
  at either of these hours being more than double that at 11 A.M. On the
  Patscherkofel, H. von Ficker and A. Defant (52), observing in
  December, found q largest from 1 to 2 P.M. and least between 11 A.M.
  and noon, but the largest value was only 1½ times the least. On
  mountains much seems to depend on whether there are rising or falling
  air currents, and results from a single season may not be fairly
  representative.

  16. Dissipation seems largely dependent on meteorological conditions,
  but the phenomena at different stations vary so much as to suggest
  that the connexion is largely indirect. At most stations a+ and a-
  both increase markedly as wind velocity rises. From the observations
  at Trieste in 1902-1903 E. Mazelle (47) deduced an increase of about
  3% in a+ for a rise of 1 km. per hour in wind velocity. The following
  are some of his figures, the velocity v being in kilometres per
  hour:--

    +-----+---------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
    |  v  | 0 to 4. | 20 to 24. | 40 to 49. | 60 to 69. |
    +-----+---------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
    |  a  |  0.33   |    0.64   |    1.03   |    1.38   |
    |  q  |  1.13   |    1.19   |    1.00   |    0.96   |
    +-----+---------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

  For velocities from 0 to 24 km. per hour q exceeded unity in 74 cases
  out of 100; but for velocities over 50 km. per hour q exceeded unity
  in only 40 cases out of 100. Simpson got similar results at Karasjok;
  the rise in a+ and a- with increased wind velocity seemed, however,
  larger in winter than in summer. Simpson observed a fall in q for wind
  velocities exceeding 2 on Beaufort's scale. On the top of the
  Sonnblick, Conrad observed a _slight_ increase of a± as the wind
  velocity increased up to 20 km. per hour, but for greater velocities
  up to 80 km. per hour no further decided rise was observed.

  At Karasjok, treating summer and winter independently, Simpson (10)
  found a+ and a- both increase in a nearly linear relation with
  temperature, from below -20° to +15° C. For example, when the
  temperature was below -20° mean values were 0.76 for a+ and 0.91 for
  a-; for temperatures between -10° and -5° the corresponding means were
  2.45 and 2.82; while for temperatures between +10° and +15° they were
  4.68 and 5.23. Simpson found no certain temperature effect on the
  value of q. At Trieste, from 470 days when the wind velocity did not
  exceed 20 km. per hour, Mazelle (47) found somewhat analogous results
  for temperatures from 0° to 30° C.; a-, however, increased faster than
  a+, i.e. q increased with temperature. When he considered all days
  irrespective of wind velocity, Mazelle found the influence of
  temperature obliterated. On the Sonnblick, Conrad (22) found a±
  increase appreciably as temperature rose up to 4° or 5° C.; but at
  higher temperatures a decrease set in.

  Observations on the Sonnblick agree with those at low-level stations
  in showing a diminution of dissipation with increase of relative
  humidity. The decrease is most marked as saturation approaches. At
  Trieste, for example, for relative humidities between 90 and 100 the
  mean a± was less than half that for relative humidities under 40. With
  certain dry winds, notably Föhn winds in Austria and Switzerland,
  dissipation becomes very high. Thus at Innsbruck Defant (45) found the
  mean dissipation on days of Föhn fully thrice that on days without
  Föhn. The increase was largest for a+, there being a fall of about 15%
  in q. In general, a+ and a- both tend to be less on cloudy than on
  bright days. At Kiel (53) and Trieste the average value of q is
  considerably less for wholly overcast days than for bright days. At
  several stations enjoying a wide prospect the dissipation has been
  observed to be specially high on days of great visibility when distant
  mountains can be recognized. It tends on the contrary to be low on
  days of fog or rain.

  The results obtained as to the relation between dissipation and
  barometric pressure are conflicting. At Kremsmünster, Zölss (42) found
  dissipation vary with the absolute height of the barometer, a± having
  a mean value of 1.36 when pressure was below the normal, as against
  1.20 on days when pressure was above the normal. He also found a± on
  the average about 10% larger when pressure was falling than when it
  was rising. On the Sonnblick, Conrad (22) found dissipation increase
  decidedly as the absolute barometric pressure was larger, and he found
  no difference between days of rising and falling barometer. At
  Trieste, Mazelle (47) found no certain connexion with absolute
  barometric pressure. Dissipation was above the average when cyclonic
  conditions prevailed, but this seemed simply a consequence of the
  increased wind velocity. At Mattsee, E.R. von Schweidler (46) found no
  connexion between absolute barometric pressure and dissipation, also
  days of rising and falling pressure gave the same mean. At Kiel, K.
  Kaehler (53) found a+ and a- both greater with rising than with
  falling barometer.

  V. Conrad and M. Topolansky (54) have found a marked connexion at
  Vienna between dissipation and ozone. Regular observations were made
  of both elements. Days were grouped according to the intensity of
  colouring of ozone papers, 0 representing no visible effect, and 14
  the darkest colour reached. The mean values of _a+_ and _a-_ answering
  to 12 and 13 on the ozone scale were both about double the
  corresponding values answering to 0 and 1 on that scale.

  17. A charged body in air loses its charge in more than one way. The
  air, as is now known, has always present in it ions, some carrying a
  positive and others a negative charge, and those having the opposite
  sign to the charged body are attracted and tend to discharge it. The
  rate of loss of charge is thus largely dependent on the extent to
  which ions are present in the surrounding air. It depends, however, in
  addition on the natural mobility of the ions, and also on the
  opportunities for convection. Of late years many observations have
  been made of the ionic charges in air. The best-known apparatus for
  the purpose is that devised by Ebert. A cylinder condenser has its
  inner surface insulated and charged to a high positive or negative
  potential. Air is drawn by an aspirator between the surfaces, and the
  ions having the opposite sign to the inner cylinder are deposited on
  it. The charge given up to the inner cylinder is known from its loss
  of potential. The volume of air from which the ions have been
  extracted being known, a measure is obtained of the total charge on
  the ions, whether positive or negative. The conditions must, of
  course, be such as to secure that no ions shall escape, otherwise
  there is an underestimate. I+ is used to denote the charge on positive
  ions, I- that on negative ions. The unit to which they are ordinarily
  referred is 1 electrostatic unit of electricity per cubic metre of
  air. For the ratio of the mean value of I+ to the mean value of I-,
  the letter Q is employed by Gockel (55), who has made an unusually
  complete study of ionic charges at Freiburg. Numerous observations
  were also made by Simpson (10)--thrice a day--at Karasjok, and von
  Schweidler has made a good many observations about 3 P.M. at Mattsee
  (46) in 1905, and Seewalchen (38) in 1904. These will suffice to give
  a general idea of the mean values met with.

    +------------+-----------------+------+------+------+
    | Station.   |    Authority.   |  I+  |  I-  |   Q  |
    +------------+-----------------+------+------+------+
    | Freiburg   | Gockel          | 0.34 | 0.24 | 1.41 |
    | Karasjok   | Simpson         | 0.38 | 0.33 | 1.17 |
    | Mattsee    | von Schweidler  | 0.35 | 0.29 | 1.19 |
    | Seewalchen |        "        | 0.45 | 0.38 | 1.17 |
    +------------+-----------------+------+------+------+

  Gockel's mean values of I+ and Q would be reduced to 0.31 and 1.38
  respectively if his values for July--which appear abnormal--were
  omitted. I+ and I- both show a considerable range of values, even at
  the same place during the same season of the year. Thus at Seewalchen
  in the course of a month's observations at 3 P.M., I+ varied from 0.31
  to 0.67, and I- from 0.17 to 0.67.

  There seems a fairly well marked annual variation in ionic contents,
  as the following figures will show. Summer and winter represent each
  six months and the results are arithmetic means of the monthly values.

    +--------+--------------------+--------------------+
    |        |      Freiburg.     |      Karasjok.     |
    +--------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
    |        |  I+  |  I-  |  Q   |  I+  |  I-  |  Q   |
    +--------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
    | Winter | 0.29 | 0.21 | 1.49 | 0.33 | 0.27 | 1.22 |
    | Summer | 0.39 | 0.28 | 1.34 | 0.44 | 0.39 | 1.13 |
    +--------+------+------+------+------+------+------+

  If the exceptional July values at Freiburg were omitted, the summer
  values of I+ and Q would become 0.33 and 1.25 respectively.

  18. _Diurnal Variation._--At Karasjok Simpson found the mean values of
  I+ and I- throughout the whole year much the same between noon and 1
  P.M. as between 8 and 9 A.M. Observations between 6 and 7 P.M. gave
  means slightly lower than those from the earlier hours, but the
  difference was only about 5% in I+ and 10% in I-. The evening values
  of Q were on the whole the largest. At Freiburg, Gockel found I+ and
  I- decidedly larger in the early afternoon than in either the morning
  or the late evening hours. His greatest and least mean hourly values
  and the hours of their occurrence are as follows:--

    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |            Winter.            |            Summer.            |
    +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
    |      I+       |      I-       |      I+       |      I-       |
    +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
    |  Max. |  Min. |  Max. |  Min. |  Max. |  Min. |  Max. |  Min. |
    | 0.333 | 0.193 | 0.242 | 0.130 | 0.430 | 0.244 | 0.333 | 0.192 |
    | 2 P.M.| 7 P.M.| 2 P.M.| 8 P.M.| 4 P.M.| 9 to  | 4 P.M.| 9 to  |
    |       |       |       |       |       |10 P.M.|       |10 P.M.|
    +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

  Gockel did not observe between 10 P.M. and 7 A.M.

  19. Ionization seems to increase notably as temperature rises. Thus at
  Karasjok Simpson found for mean values:--

    Temp. less than -20°        -10° to -5°             10° to 15°
    I+ = 0.18, I- = 0.36    I+ = 0.36, I- = 0.30   I+ = 0.45, I- = 0.43

  Simpson found no clear influence of temperature on Q. Gockel observed
  similar effects at Freiburg--though he seems doubtful whether the
  relationship is direct--but the influence of temperature on I+ seemed
  reduced when the ground was covered with snow. Gockel found a
  diminution of ionization with rise of relative humidity. Thus for
  relative humidities between 40 and 50 mean values were 0.306 for I+
  and 0.219 for I-; whilst for relative humidities between 90 and 100
  the corresponding means were respectively 0.222 and 0.134. At
  Karasjok, Simpson found a slight decrease in I- as relative humidity
  increased, but no certain change in I+. Specially large values of I+
  and I- have been observed at high levels in balloon ascents. Thus on
  the 1st of July 1901, at a height of 2400 metres, H. Gerdien (29)
  obtained 0.86 for I+ and 1.09 for I-.

  20. In 1901 Elster and Geitel found that a radioactive emanation is
  present in the atmosphere. Their method of measuring the radioactivity
  is as follows (48): A wire not exceeding 1 mm. in diameter, charged to
  a negative potential of at least 2000 volts, is supported between
  insulators in the open, usually at a height of about 2 metres. After
  two hours' exposure, it is wrapped round a frame supported in a given
  position relative to Elster and Geitel's dissipation apparatus, and
  the loss of charge is noted. This loss is proportional to the length
  of the wire. The radioactivity is denoted by A, and A=1 signifies that
  the potential of the dissipation apparatus fell 1 volt in an hour per
  metre of wire introduced. The loss of the dissipation body due to the
  natural ionization of the air is first allowed for. Suppose, for
  instance, that in the absence of the wire the potential falls from 264
  to 255 volts in 15 minutes, whilst when the wire (10 metres long) is
  introduced it falls from 264 to 201 volts in 10 minutes, then

    10A = (254 - 201)×6 - (264 - 255)×4 = 342; or A = 34.2.

  The values obtained for A seem largely dependent on the station. At
  Wolfenbüttel, a year's observations by Elster and Geitel (56) made A
  vary from 4 to 64, the mean being 20. In the island of Juist, off the
  Friesland coast, from three weeks' observations they obtained only 5.2
  as the mean. On the other hand, at Altjoch, an Alpine station, from
  nine days' observations in July 1903 they obtained a mean of 137, the
  maximum being 224, and the minimum 92. At Freiburg, from 150 days'
  observations near noon in 1903-1904, Gockel (57) obtained a mean of
  84, his extreme values being 10 and 420. At Karasjok, observing
  several times throughout the day for a good many months, Simpson (10)
  obtained a mean of 93 and a maximum of 432. The same observer from
  four weeks' observations at Hammerfest got the considerably lower mean
  value 58, with a maximum of 252. At this station much lower values
  were found for A with sea breezes than with land breezes. Observing on
  the pier at Swinemünde in August and September 1904, Lüdeling (40)
  obtained a mean value of 34.

  Elster and Geitel (58), having found air drawn from the soil highly
  radioactive, regard ground air as the source of the emanation in the
  atmosphere, and in this way account for the low values they obtained
  for A when observing on or near the sea. At Freiburg in winter Gockel
  (55) found A notably reduced when snow was on the ground, I+ being
  also reduced. When the ground was covered by snow the mean value of A
  was only 42, as compared with 81 when there was no snow.

  J.C. McLennan (59) observing near the foot of Niagara found A only
  about one-sixth as large as at Toronto. Similarly at Altjoch, Elster
  and Geitel (56) found A at the foot of a waterfall only about
  one-third of its normal value at a distance from the fall.

  21. _Annual and Diurnal Variations._--At Wolfenbüttel, Elster and
  Geitel found A vary but little with the season. At Karasjok, on the
  contrary, Simpson found A much larger at midwinter--notwithstanding
  the presence of snow--than at midsummer. His mean value for November
  and December was 129, while his mean for May and June was only 47. He
  also found a marked diurnal variation, A being considerably greater
  between 3 and 5 A.M. or 8.30 to 10.30 P.M. than between 10 A.M. and
  noon, or between 3 and 5 P.M.

  At all seasons of the year Simpson found A rise notably with increase
  of relative humidity. Also, whilst the mere absolute height of the
  barometer seemed of little, if any, importance, he obtained larger
  values of A with a falling than with a rising barometer. This last
  result of course is favourable to Elster and Geitel's views as to the
  source of the emanation.

  22. For a wire exposed under the conditions observed by Elster and
  Geitel the emanation seems to be almost entirely derived from radium.
  Some part, however, seems to be derived from thorium, and H.A.
  Bumstead (60) finds that with longer exposure of the wire the relative
  importance of the thorium emanation increases. With three hours'
  exposure he found the thorium emanation only from 3 to 5% of the
  whole, but with 12 hours' exposure the percentage of thorium emanation
  rose to about 15. These figures refer to the state of the wire
  immediately after the exposure; the rate of decay is much more rapid
  for the radium than for the thorium emanation.

  23. The different elements--potential gradient, dissipation,
  ionization and radioactivity--are clearly not independent of one
  another. The loss of a charge is naturally largely dependent on the
  richness of the surrounding air in ions. This is clearly shown by the
  following results obtained by Simpson (10) at Karasjok for the mean
  values of a± corresponding to certain groups of values of I±. To
  eliminate the disturbing influence of wind, different wind strengths
  are treated separately.

    TABLE VIII.--_Mean Values of a±._

    +----------+-----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    |   Wind   |I±0 to 0.1.|0.1 to 0.2|0.2 to 0.3|0.3 to 0.4|0.4 to 0.5|
    | Strength.|           |          |          |          |          |
    +----------+-----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
    |  0 to 1  |   0.45    |   0.60   |   1.26   |   2.04   |   3.03   |
    |  1 "  2  |   0.65    |   1.08   |   1.85   |   2.92   |   3.83   |
    |  2 "  3  |    ..     |    ..    |   2.70   |   3.88   |   5.33   |
    +----------+-----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+

  Simspon concluded that for a given wind velocity dissipation is
  practically a linear function of ionization.

  24. Table IX. will give a general idea of the relations of potential
  gradient to dissipation and ionization.

    TABLE IX.--_Potential, Dissipation, Ionization._

    +------------+----------------------------+----------------------------------+
    | Potential  |             q              |      Karasjok (Simpson (10)).    |
    | gradients  |                            |                                  |
    | volts per  +----------+--------+--------+------+------+------+------+------+
    |   metre.   | Kremsmün-| Freibu-| Rothho-|  a+  |  a-  |  I+  |  I-  |   Q  |
    |            | ster(41).|rg (43).| rn(43).|      |      |      |      |      |
    +------------+----------+--------+--------+------+------+------+------+------+
    |   0 to  50 |    ..    |  1.12  |   ..   |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |
    |  50 "  100 |   1.14   |  1.31  |   ..   | 4.29 | 4.67 | 0.43 | 0.39 | 1.11 |
    | 100 "  150 |   1.24   |  1.69  |   ..   | 3.38 | 3.93 | 0.37 | 0.32 | 1.15 |
    | 150 "  200 |   1.48   |  1.84  |   ..   | 1.85 | 2.58 | 0.36 | 0.28 | 1.28 |
    | 200 "  300 |    ..    |   ..   |  3.21  | 1.37 | 1.58 | 0.26 | 0.19 | 1.42 |
    | 300 "  400 |    ..    |   ..   |  4.33  | 0.60 | 0.85 |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |
    | 400 "  500 |    ..    |   ..   |  5.46  |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |
    | 500 "  700 |    ..    |   ..   |  8.75  |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |  ..  |
    +------------+----------+--------+--------+------+------+------+------+------+

  If we regard the potential gradient near the ground as representing a
  negative charge on the earth, then if the source of supply of that
  charge is unaffected the gradient will rise and become high when the
  operations by which discharge is promoted slacken their activity. A
  diminution in the number of positive ions would thus naturally be
  accompanied by a rise in potential gradient. Table IX. associates with
  rise in potential gradient a reduced number of both positive and
  negative ions and a diminished rate of dissipation whether of a
  negative or a positive charge. The rise in q and Q indicates that the
  diminished rate of dissipation is most marked for positive charges,
  and that negative ions are even more reduced then positive.

  At Kremsmünster Zölss (41) finds a considerable similarity between the
  diurnal variations in q and in the potential gradient, the hours of
  the forenoon and afternoon maxima being nearly the same in the two
  cases.

  No distinct relationship has yet been established between potential
  gradient and radioactivity. At Karasjok Simpson (10) found fairly
  similar mean values of A for two groups of observations, one confined
  to cases when the potential gradient exceeded +400 volts, the other
  confined to cases of negative gradient.

  At Freiburg Gockel (55, 57) found that when observations were grouped
  according to the value of A there appeared a distinct rise in both a-
  and I+ with increasing A. For instance, when A lay between 100 and 150
  the mean value of a- was 1.27 times greater than when A lay between 0
  and 50; while when A lay between 120 and 150 the mean value of I+ was
  1.53 times larger than when A lay between 0 and 30. These apparent
  relationships refer to mean values. In individual cases widely
  different values of a- or I+ are associated with the same value of A.

  25. If V be the potential, [rho] the density of free electricity at a
  point in the atmosphere, at a distance r from the earth's centre, then
  assuming statical conditions and neglecting variation of V in
  horizontal directions, we have

    r^(-2)(d/dr)(r² dV/dr) + 4[pi][rho] = 0.

  For practical purposes we may treat r² as constant, and replace d/dr
  by d/dh, where h is height in centimetres above the ground.

  We thus find    [rho] = -(1/4[pi]) d²V/dh².

  If we take a tube of force 1 sq. cm. in section, and suppose it cut by
  equipotential surfaces at heights h1 and h2 above the ground, we have
  for the total charge M included in the specified portion of the tube

    4[pi]M = (dV/dh)h1 - (dV/dh)h2.

  Taking Linke's (28) figures as given in § 10, and supposing h1 = 0, h2
  = 15 × 10^4, we find for the charge in the unit tube between the
  ground and 1500 metres level, remembering that the centimetre is now
  the unit of length, M = (1/(4[pi])) (125.25)/100. Taking 1 volt equal
  1/300 of an electrostatic unit, we find M = 0.000265. Between 1500 and
  4000 metres the charge inside the unit tube is much less, only
  0.000040. The charge on the earth itself has its surface density given
  by [sigma] = - (1/(4[pi])) × 125 volts per metre, = 0.000331 in e
  ectrostatic units. Thus, on the view now generally current, in the
  circumstances answering to Linke's experiments we have on the ground a
  charge of -331 × 10^(-6) C.G.S. units per sq. cm. Of the corresponding
  positive charge, 265 × 10^(-6) lies below the 1500 metres level, 40 ×
  10^(-6) between this and the 4000 metres level, and only 26 × 10^(-6)
  above 4000 metres.

  There is a difficulty in reconciling observed values of the ionization
  with the results obtained from balloon ascents as to the variation of
  the potential with altitude. According to H. Gerdien (61), near the
  ground a mean value for d²V/dh² is - (1/10) volt/(metre)². From this
  we deduce for the charge [rho] per cubic centimetre (1/(4[pi])) ×
  10^(-5) (volt/cm²), or 2.7 × 10^(-9) electrostatic units. But taking,
  for example, Simpson's mean values at Karasjok, we have observed

    [rho] [equivalent] I+ - I1 = 0.05 × (cm./metre)^3 = 5 × 10^(-8),

  and thus (calculated [rho])/(observed [rho]) = 0.05 approximately.
  Gerdien himself makes I+ - I- considerably larger than Simpson, and
  concludes that the observed value of [rho] is from 30 to 50 times that
  calculated. The presumption is either that d²V/dh² near the ground is
  much larger numerically than Gerdien supposes, or else that the
  ordinary instruments for measuring ionization fail to catch some
  species of ion whose charge is preponderatingly negative.

  26. Gerdien (61) has made some calculations as to the probable average
  value of the vertical electric current in the atmosphere in fine
  weather. This will be composed of a conduction and a convection
  current, the latter due to rising or falling air currents carrying
  ions. He supposes the field near the earth to be 100 volts per metre,
  or 1/300 electrostatic units. For simplicity, he assumes I+ and I-
  each equal 0.25 × 10^(-6) electrostatic units. The specific velocities
  of the ions--i.e. the velocities in unit field--he takes to be 1.3 ×
  300 for the positive, and 1.6 × 300 for the negative. The positive and
  negative ions travel in opposite directions, so the total current is
  (1/300)(0.25 × 10^(-6))(1.3 × 300 + 1.6 × 300), or 73 × 10^(-8) in
  electrostatic measure, otherwise 2.4 × 10^(-16) amperes per sq. cm. As
  to the convection current, Gerdien supposes--as in § 25--[rho] = 2.7 ×
  10^(-9) electrostatic units, and on fine days puts the average
  velocity of rising air currents at 10 cm. per second. This gives a
  convection current of 2.7 × 10^(-8) electrostatic units, or about 1/27
  of the conduction current. For the total current we have approximately
  2.5 × 10^(-16) amperes per sq. cm. This is insignificant compared to
  the size of the currents which several authorities have calculated
  from considerations as to terrestrial magnetism (q.v.). Gerdien's
  estimate of the convection current is for fine weather conditions.
  During rainfall, or near clouds or dust layers, the magnitude of this
  current might well be enormously increased; its direction would
  naturally vary with climatic conditions.

  27. H. Mache (62) thinks that the ionization observed in the
  atmosphere may be wholly accounted for by the radioactive emanation.
  If this is true we should have q = [alpha] n², where q is the number
  of ions of one sign made in 1 cc. of air per second by the emanation,
  [alpha] the constant of recombination, and n the number of ions found
  simultaneously by, say, Ebert's apparatus. Mache and R. Holfmann, from
  observations on the amplitude of saturation currents, deduce q = 4 as
  a mean value. Taking for [alpha] Townsend's value 1.2 × 10^(-6), Mache
  finds n = 1800. The charge on an ion being 3.4 × 10^(-10) Mache
  deduces for the ionic charge, I+ or I-, per cubic metre 1800 × 3.4 ×
  10^(-10) × 10^6, or 0.6. This is at least of the order observed, which
  is all that can be expected from a calculation which assumes I+ and I-
  equal. If, however, Mache's views were correct, we should expect a
  much closer connexion between I and A than has actually been observed.

  28. C.T.R. Wilson (63) seems disposed to regard the action of rainfall
  as the most probable source of the negative charge on the earth's
  surface. That great separation of positive and negative electricity
  sometimes takes place during rainfall is undoubted, and the charge
  brought to the ground seems preponderatingly negative. The difficulty
  is in accounting for the continuance in extensive fine weather
  districts of large positive charges in the atmosphere in face of the
  processes of recombination always in progress. Wilson considers that
  convection currents in the upper atmosphere would be quite inadequate,
  but conduction may, he thinks, be sufficient alone. At barometric
  pressures such as exist between 18 and 36 kilometres above the ground
  the mobility of the ions varies inversely as the pressure, whilst the
  coefficient of recombination [alpha] varies approximately as the
  pressure. If the atmosphere at different heights is exposed to
  ionizing radiation of uniform intensity the rate of production of ions
  per cc., q, will vary as the pressure. In the steady state the number,
  n, of ions of either sign per cc. is given by n = [root](q/[alpha]),
  and so is independent of the pressure or the height. The conductivity,
  which varies as the product of n into the mobility, will thus vary
  inversely as the pressure, and so at 36 kilometres will be one hundred
  times as large as close to the ground. Dust particles interfere with
  conduction near the ground, so the relative conductivity in the upper
  layers may be much greater than that calculated. Wilson supposes that
  by the fall to the ground of a preponderance of negatively charged
  rain the air above the shower has a higher positive potential than
  elsewhere at the same level, thus leading to large conduction currents
  laterally in the highly conducting upper layers.

  29. _Thunder._--Trustworthy frequency statistics for an individual
  station are obtainable only from a long series of observations, while
  if means are taken from a large area places may be included which
  differ largely amongst themselves. There is the further complication
  that in some countries thunder seems to be on the increase. In
  temperate latitudes, speaking generally, the higher the latitude the
  fewer the thunderstorms. For instance, for Edinburgh (64) (1771 to
  1900) and London (65) (1763 to 1896) R.C. Mossman found the average
  annual number of thunderstorm days to be respectively 6.4 and 10.7;
  while at Paris (1873-1893) E. Renou (66) found 27.3 such days. In some
  tropical stations, at certain seasons of the year, thunder is almost a
  daily occurrence. At Batavia (18) during the epoch 1867-1895, there
  were on the average 120 days of thunder in the year.

  As an example of a large area throughout which thunder frequency
  appears fairly uniform, we may take Hungary (67). According to the
  statistics for 1903, based on several hundred stations, the average
  number of days of thunder throughout six subdivisions of the country,
  some wholly plain, others mainly mountainous, varied only from 21.1 to
  26.5, the mean for the whole of Hungary being 23.5. The antithesis of
  this exists in the United States of America. According to A.J. Henry
  (68) there are three regions of maximum frequency: one in the
  south-east, with its centre in Florida, has an average of 45 days of
  thunder in the year; a second including the middle Mississippi valley
  has an average of 35 days; and a third in the middle Missouri valley
  has 30. With the exception of a narrow strip along the Canadian
  frontier, thunderstorm frequency is fairly high over the whole of the
  United States to the east of the 100th meridian. But to the west of
  this, except in the Rocky Mountain region where storms are numerous,
  the frequency steadily diminishes, and along the Pacific coast there
  are large areas where thunder occurs only once or twice a year.

  30. The number of thunderstorm days is probably a less exact measure
  of the relative _intensity_ of thunderstorms than statistics as to the
  number of persons killed annually by lightning per million of the
  population. Table X. gives a number of statistics of this kind. The
  letter M stands for "Midland."

    TABLE X.--_Deaths by Lightning, per annum, per million Inhabitants._

    Hungary                  7.7     Upper Missouri and Plains   15
    Netherlands              2.8     Rocky Mountains and Plateau 10
    England, N. M.           1.8     South Atlantic               8
       "     E.              1.3     Central Mississippi          7
       "     S. M.           1.2     Upper    "                   7
       "     York and W. M.  1.1     Ohio Valley                  7
       "     N.              1.0     Middle Atlantic              6
    Wales                    0.9     Gulf States                  5
    England, S. E.           0.8     New England                  4
       "     N. W.           0.7     Pacific Coast               <1*
       "     S. W.           0.6     North and South Dakota      20
    London                   0.1     California                   0

    * Note in case of Pacific coast, Table X., "<1" means "less than 1."

  The figure for Hungary is based on the seven years 1897-1903; that for
  the Netherlands, from data by A.J. Monné (69) on the nine years
  1882-1890. The English data, due to R. Lawson (70), are from
  twenty-four years, 1857-1880; those for the United States, due to
  Henry (68), are for five years, 1896-1900. In comparing these data
  allowance must be made for the fact that danger from lightning is much
  greater out of doors than in. Thus in Hungary, in 1902 and 1903, out
  of 229 persons killed, at least 171 were killed out of doors. Of the
  229 only 67 were women, the only assignable explanation being their
  rarer employment in the fields. Thus, _ceteris paribtis_, deaths from
  lightning are much more numerous in a country than in an industrial
  population. This is well brought out by the low figure for London. It
  is also shown conspicuously in figures given by Henry. In New York
  State, where the population is largely industrial, the annual deaths
  per million are only three, but of the agricultural population eleven.
  In states such as Wyoming and the Dakotas the population is largely
  rural, and the deaths by lightning rise in consequence. The frequency
  and intensity of thunderstorms are unquestionably greater in the Rocky
  Mountain than in the New England states, but the difference is not so
  great as the statistics at first sight suggest.

    TABLE XI.--_Annual Variation of Thunderstorms._

    +--------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
    |              | Jan. | Feb. | Mar. | Apr. | May. | June | July | Aug. | Sep. | Oct. | Nov. | Dec. |
    +--------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
    | Ediburgh     |  1.8 |  1.4 |  1.4 |  3.8 | 12.3 | 20.8 | 28.2 | 19.1 |  7.0 |  2.3 |  1.1 |  0.8 |
    | London       |  0.6 |  0.5 |  1.6 |  6.6 | 12.7 | 18.3 | 25.5 | 19.2 |  9.3 |  3.1 |  1.7 |  0.9 |
    | Paris        |  0.2 |  0.4 |  2.3 |  7.5 | 14.9 | 21.6 | 22.0 | 17.0 |  9.9 |  3.5 |  0.4 |  0.4 |
    | Netherlands  |  2.2 |  1.8 |  3.7 |  6.5 | 14.0 | 14.7 | 15.6 | 14.7 | 10.3 | 10.1 |  3.8 |  2.5 |
    | France       |  2.2 |  2.8 |  4.1 |  8.4 | 13.8 | 18.7 | 14.6 | 13.5 | 10.0 |  6.3 |  3.1 |  2.4 |
    | Switzerland  |  0.2 |  0.3 |  0.5 |  4.9 | 11.9 | 22.9 | 29.9 | 18.0 |  9.8 |  1.1 |  0.3 |  0.2 |
    | Hungary (a)  |  0.0 |  0.1 |  1.6 |  5.7 | 20.9 | 25.0 | 23.2 | 15.9 |  5.7 |  1.3 |  0.4 |  0.2 |
    |    "    (b)  |  0.0 |  0.0 |  1.0 |  3.2 | 11.8 | 20.6 | 30.7 | 25.3 |  6.9 |  0.5 |  0.0 |  0.0 |
    | United States|  0.1 |  0.1 |  1.2 |  4.0 | 14.3 | 25.0 | 27.2 | 20.4 |  5.8 |  1.4 |  0.3 |  0.1 |
    | Hong-Kong    |  0.0 |  2.1 |  4.3 |  8.5 | 12.8 | 23.4 | 14.9 | 21.3 | 10.6 |  2.1 |  0.0 |  0.0 |
    | Trevandrum   |  3.2 |  3.8 | 13.1 | 20.9 | 18.6 |  4.9 |  1.2 |  3.5 |  2.5 | 12.9 | 12.0 |  3.3 |
    | Batavia      | 10.4 |  9.2 | 11.1 | 10.5 |  7.9 |  5.5 |  4.3 |  3.8 |  5.4 |  8.8 | 12.2 | 10.9 |
    +--------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+

  31. Even at the same place thunderstorms vary greatly in intensity and
  duration. Also the times of beginning and ending are difficult to
  define exactly, so that several elements of uncertainty exist in data
  as to the seasonal or diurnal variation. The monthly data in Table XI.
  are percentages of the total for the year. In most cases the figures
  are based on the number of days of thunder at a particular station, or
  at the average station of a country; but the second set for Hungary
  relates to the number of lightning strokes causing fire, and the
  figures for the United States relate to deaths by lightning. The data
  for Edinburgh, due to R.C. Mossman (64), refer to 130 years, 1771 to
  1900. The data for London (1763-1896) are also due to Mossman (65);
  for Paris (1873-1893) to Renou (66); for the Netherlands (1882-1900)
  to A.J. Monné (69); for France(71) (1886-1899) to Frou and Hann; for
  Switzerland to K. Hess (72); for Hungary (67) (1896-1903) to L. von
  Szalay and others; for the United States (1890-1900) to A.J. Henry
  (68); for Hong-Kong (73) (1894-1903) to W. Doberck. The Trevandrum
  (74) data (1853-1864) were due originally to A. Broun; the Batavia
  data (1867-1895) are from the Batavia _Observations_, vol. xviii.

  Most stations in the northern hemisphere have a conspicuous maximum at
  midsummer with little thunder in winter. Trevandrum (8° 31' N.) and
  Batavia (6° 11' S.), especially the former, show a double maximum and
  minimum.

    TABLE XII.--_Diurnal Variation of Thunderstorms._

    +--------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+
    |         Hour.      | 0-2.| 2-4.| 4-6.| 6-8.|8-10.|10-12.|0'-2'.|2'-4'.|4'-6'.|6'-8'.|8'-10'|10'-12'|
    +--------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+
    | Finland (76)       | 2.3 | 2.0 | 2.2 | 3.0 | 4.6 | 12.1 | 18.9 | 19.2 | 16.1 | 10.1 |  6.1 |  3.4  |
    | Edinburgh (64)     | 1.7 | 2.0 | 1.4 | 1.7 | 4.7 | 14.2 | 22.4 | 23.7 | 11.9 |  9.2 |  5.1 |  2.0  |
    | Belgium (77)       | 3.0 | 2.9 | 1.7 | 1.8 | 2.0 |  6.4 | 12.9 | 21.6 | 19.4 | 15.8 |  8.4 |  4.1  |
    | Brocken (78)       | 1.6 | 2.5 | 1.3 | 1.3 | 4.2 |  3.1 | 12.1 | 28.6 | 22.4 | 10.1 |  7.2 |  5.6  |
    | Switzerland (72)   | 3.1 | 2.3 | 2.1 | 1.6 | 2.0 |  7.3 | 13.8 | 20.9 | 20.8 | 14.6 |  8.0 |  3.5  |
    | Italy (77)         | 1.3 | 1.6 | 1.4 | 2.0 | 3.0 |  8.5 | 19.5 | 26.5 | 16.6 |  9.8 |  8.3 |  1.5  |
    | Hungary (i.) (67)  | 2.1 | 1.9 | 1.9 | 2.1 | 2.9 | 11.5 | 18.1 | 22.0 | 17.9 | 10.7 |  6.2 |  2.8  |
    |    "    (ii.) (67) | 6.9 | 4.2 | 2.3 | 2.0 | 2.0 |  5.0 |  9.9 | 16.9 | 18.2 | 10.7 | 11.7 | 10.0  |
    |    "    (iii.) (75)| 2.3 | 1.9 | 2.0 | 2.4 | 2.7 |  7.9 | 16.1 | 22.1 | 19.1 | 12.7 |  7.6 |  3.2  |
    |    "    (iv.) (75) | 2.6 | 2.2 | 1.9 | 1.9 | 3.6 | 13.3 | 19.9 | 20.7 | 15.2 |  9.2 |  6.2 |  3.3  |
    | Trevandrum (74)    | 5.6 | 4.9 | 4.3 | 1.3 | 1.4 |  2.0 | 13.3 | 24.5 | 15.9 | 13.3 |  7.6 |  5.9  |
    | Agustia (74)       | 2.9 | 2.9 | 0.3 | 0.0 | 1.7 |  2.9 | 15.1 | 36.1 | 22.2 |  9.3 |  4.6 |  2.0  |
    +--------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+------+------+------+-------+

  32. _Daily Variation._--The figures in Table XII. are again
  percentages. They are mostly based on data as to the hour of
  commencement of thunderstorms. Data as to the hour when storms are
  most severe would throw the maximum later in the day. This is
  illustrated by the first two sets of figures for Hungary (67). The
  first set relate as usual to the hour of commencement, the second to
  the hours of occurrence of lightning causing fires. Of the two other
  sets of figures for Hungary (75), (iii.) relates to the central plain,
  (iv.) to the mountainous regions to north and south of this. The hour
  of maximum is earlier for the mountains, thunder being more frequent
  there than in the plains between 8 A.M. and 4 P.M., but less frequent
  between 2 and 10 P.M. Trevandrum (8° 31' N., 76° 59' E., 195 ft. above
  sea-level) and Agustia (8° 37' N., 77° 20' E., 6200 ft. above
  sea-level) afford a contrast between low ground and high ground in
  India. In this instance there seems little difference in the hour of
  maximum, the distinguishing feature being the great concentration of
  thunderstorm occurrence at Agustia between noon and 6 P.M.

    TABLE XIII.

    +------+-------------+--------+---------+-------+
    | Year.| Netherlands.| France.| Hungary.| U.S.A.|
    +------+-------------+--------+---------+-------+
    | 1882 |      98     |   ..   |   141   |  ..   |
    | 1883 |     117     |   ..   |   195   |  ..   |
    | 1884 |      95     |   ..   |   229   |  ..   |
    | 1885 |      93     |   ..   |   192   |  ..   |
    | 1886 |     102     |   251  |   319   |  ..   |
    | 1887 |      78     |   292  |   236   |  ..   |
    | 1888 |      94     |   286  |   232   |  ..   |
    | 1889 |     126     |   294  |   258   |  ..   |
    | 1890 |      93     |   299  |   265   |  ..   |
    | 1891 |      98     |   317  |   302   |  204  |
    | 1892 |      86     |   324  |   350   |  251  |
    | 1893 |     102     |   288  |   233   |  209  |
    | 1894 |     111     |   300  |   333   |  336  |
    | 1895 |     119     |   309  |   280   |  426  |
    | 1896 |     109     |   266  |   299   |  341  |
    | 1897 |     119     |   297  |   350   |  362  |
    | 1898 |      95     |   299  |   386   |  367  |
    | 1899 |     112     |   299  |   368   |  563  |
    | 1900 |     108     |   ..   |   401   |  713  |
    | 1901 |     ..      |   ..   |   502   |  ..   |
    | 1902 |     ..      |   ..   |   322   |  ..   |
    | 1903 |     ..      |   ..   |   256   |  ..   |
    +------+-------------+--------+---------+-------+

  33. Table XIII. gives some data as to the variability of thunder from
  year to year. The figures for the Netherlands (69) and France (71) are
  the number of days when thunder occurred somewhere in the country. Its
  larger area and more varied climate give a much larger number of days
  of thunder to France. Notwithstanding the proximity of the two
  countries, there is not much parallelism between the data. The figures
  for Hungary (67) give the number of lightning strokes causing fire;
  those for the United States (68) give the number of persons killed by
  lightning. The conspicuous maximum in 1901 and great drop in 1902 in
  Hungary are also shown by the statistics as to the number of days of
  thunder. This number at the average station of the country fell from
  38.4 in 1901 to 23.1 in 1902. On the whole, however, the number of
  destructive lightning strokes and of days of thunder do not show a
  close parallelism.

    TABLE XIV.

    +----------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    | Decade ending  | 1810| 1820| 1830| 1840| 1850| 1860| 1870| 1880| 1890| 1900|
    +----------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    | Edinburgh      |  4.9|  5.7|  7.7|  6.7|  5.7|  6.5|  5.4| 10.6|  9.4|  9.2|
    | London         |  9.5|  8.3| 11.5| 11.8| 10.5| 11.9|  9.6| 15.7| 13.0|  .. |
    | Tilsit         |  .. |  .. | 12.5| 12.1| 16.1| 15.3| 11.9| 17.6| 21.8|  .. |
    | Germany, South |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. |  49 |  66 |  91 | 143 | 175 |
    |    "     West  |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. |  92 | 106 | 187 | 244 | 331 |
    |    "     North |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. | 124 | 135 | 245 | 288 | 352 |
    |    "     East  |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. | 102 | 143 | 186 | 210 | 273 |
    |    "     Whole |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. |  .. |  90 | 116 | 189 | 254 | 318 |
    +----------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+

  34. Table XIV. deals with the variation of thunder over longer
  periods. The data for Edinburgh (64) and London (65) due to Mossman,
  and those for Tilsit, due to C. Kassner (79), represent the average
  number of days of thunder per annum. The data for Germany, due to O.
  Steffens (80), represent the average number of houses struck by
  lightning in a year per million houses; in the first decade only seven
  years (1854-1860) are really included. Mossman thinks that the
  apparent increase at Edinburgh and London in the later decades is to
  some extent at least real. The two sets of figures show some
  corroborative features, notably the low frequency from 1860 to 1870.
  The figures for Germany--representing four out of six divisions of
  that country--are remarkable. In Germany as a whole, out of a million
  houses the number struck per annum was three and a half times as great
  in the decade 1890 to 1900 as between 1854 and 1860. Von Bezold (81)
  in an earlier memoir presented data analogous to Steffens', seemingly
  accepting them as representing a true increase in thunderstorm
  destructiveness. Doubts have, however, been expressed by others--e.g.
  A. Gockel, _Das Gewitter_, p. 106--as to the real significance of the
  figures. Changes in the height or construction of buildings, and a
  greater readiness to make claims on insurance offices, may be
  contributory causes.

  35. The fact that a considerable number of people sheltering under
  trees are killed by lightning is generally accepted as a convincing
  proof of the unwisdom of the proceeding. When there is an option
  between a tree and an adjacent house, the latter is doubtless the
  safer choice. But when the option is between sheltering under a tree
  and remaining in the open it is not so clear. In Hungary (67), during
  the three years 1901 to 1903, 15% of the total deaths by lightning
  occurred under trees, as against 57% wholly in the open. In the United
  States (68) in 1900, only 10% of the deaths where the precise
  conditions were ascertained occurred under trees, as against 52% in
  the open. If then the risk under trees exceeds that in the open in
  Hungary and the United States, at least five or six times as many
  people must remain in the open as seek shelter under trees. An
  isolated tree occupying an exposed position is, it should be
  remembered, much more likely to be struck than the average tree in the
  midst of a wood. A good deal also depends on the species of tree. A
  good many years' data for Lippe (82) in Germany make the liability to
  lightning stroke as follows--the number of each species being supposed
  the same:--Oak 57, Fir 39, Pine 5, Beech 1. In Styria, according to K.
  Prohaska (83), the species most liable to be struck are oaks, poplars
  and pear trees; beech trees again are exceptionally safe. It should,
  however, be borne in mind that the apparent differences between
  different species may be partly a question of height, exposure or
  proximity to water. A good deal may also depend on the soil. According
  to Hellmann, as quoted by Henry (82), the liability to lightning
  stroke in Germany may be put at chalk 1, clay 7, sand 9, loam 22.

  36. Numerous attempts have been made to find periodic variations in
  thunderstorm frequency. Among the periods suggested are the 11-year
  sun-spot period, or half this (cf. v. Szalay (67)). Ekholm and
  Arrhenius (84) claim to have established the existence of a tropical
  lunar period, and a 25.929-day period; while P. Polis (85) considers a
  synodic lunar period probable. A.B. MacDowall (86) and others have
  advanced evidence in favour of the view that thunderstorms are most
  frequent near new moon and fewest near full moon. Much more evidence
  would be required to produce a general acceptance of any of the above
  periods.

  37. _St Elmo's Fire._--Luminous discharges from masts, lightning
  conductors, and other pointed objects are not very infrequent,
  especially during thunderstorms. On the Sonnblick, where the
  phenomenon is common, Elster and Geitel (87) have found St Elmo's fire
  to answer to a discharge sometimes of positive sometimes of negative
  electricity. The colour and appearance differ in the two cases, red
  predominating in a positive, blue in a negative discharge. The
  differences characteristic of the two forms of discharge are described
  and illustrated in Gockel's _Das Gewitter_. Gockel states (l.c. p. 74)
  that during snowfall the sign is positive or negative according as the
  flakes are large or are small and powdery. The discharge is not
  infrequently accompanied by a sizzling sound.

  38. Of late years many experiments have been made on the influence of
  electric fields or currents on plant growth. S. Lemström (88), who was
  a pioneer in this department, found an electric field highly
  beneficial in some but not in all cases. Attempts have been made to
  apply electricity to agriculture on a commercial scale, but the exact
  measure of success attained remains somewhat doubtful. Lemström
  believed atmospheric electricity to play an important part in the
  natural growth of vegetation, and he assigned a special rôle to the
  needles of fir and pine trees.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The following abbreviations are here used:--M.Z.,
  _Meteorologische Zeitschrift_; P.Z., _Physikalische Zeitschrift_; S.,
  _Sitzungsberichte k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, Math. Naturw. Klasse_, Theil
  ii. 2; P.T., "Philosophical Transactions Royal Society of London";
  T.M., _Terrestrial Magnetism_, edited by Dr L.A. Bauer.

  Text-books:--(1) G. le Cadet, _Étude du champ électrique de
  l'atmosphère_ (Paris, 1898); (2) Svante A. Arrhenius, _Lehrbuch der
  kosmischen Physik_ (Leipzig, 1903); (3) A. Gockel, _Das Gewitter_
  (Cologne, 1905).

  Lists of original authorities:--(4) F. Exner, M.Z., vol. 17, 1900, p.
  529 (especially pp. 542-3); (5) G.C. Simpson, _Q.J.R. Met. Soc._, vol.
  31, 1905, p. 295 (especially pp. 305-6). References in the text:--(6)
  M.Z., vol. 4, 1887, p. 352; (7) T.M., vol. 4, 1899, p. 213; (8) P.Z.,
  vol. 4, p. 661; (9) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, p. 114; (10) P.T., vol. 205
  A, 1906, p. 61; (11) P.Z., vol. 5, p. 260; (12) C. Chree, P.T., vol.
  206 A, p. 299; (13) Annual volumes, _Greenwich Magnetical and
  Meteorological Observations_; (14) M.Z., vol. 8, 1891, p. 357; (15)
  M.Z., vol. 7, 1890, p. 319 and vol. 8, 1891, p. 113; (16) Annual
  volumes, _Annaes do Obs. do Infante D. Luiz_; (17) _Annual Reports_,
  Central Meteorological Observatory of Japan; (18) _Observations made
  at the Mag. and Met. Obs. at Batavia_, vol. 18, 1895; (19) J.D.
  Everett, P.T., vol. 158, 1868, p. 347; (20) M.Z., vol. 6, 1889, p. 95;
  (21) A.B. Chauveau, _Ann. bureau central météorologique, Paris, année
  1900_, "Mémoires," p. C1; (22) V. Conrad, S., 113, p. 1143; (23) P.B.
  Zölss, P.Z., vol. 5, p. 260; (24) T.M., vol. 7, 1902, p. 89; (25)
  _Revue générale des sciences_, 1906, p. 442; (26) T.M., vol. 8, 1903,
  p. 86. and vol. 9, 1904, p. 147; (27) S., 93, p. 222; (28) M.Z., vol.
  22, 1905, p. 237; (29) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 632; (30) _Phil. Mag._, vol.
  20, 1885, p. 456; (31) _Expédition polaire finlandaise_, vol. 3
  (Helsingfors, 1898); (32) A. Paulsen, _Bull. de l'Acad. ... de
  Danemarke_, 1894, p. 148; (33) _Wied. Ann._, vol. 46, 1892, p. 584;
  (34) P.T., vol. 191 A, p. 187; (35) M.Z., vol. 5, 1888, p. 95; S., 99,
  p. 421; T.M., vol. 4, 1899, p. 15; (36) _Camb. Phil. Soc. Proc._, vol.
  11, p. 428, and vol. 12, pp. 17 and 85; (37) P.Z., vol. 4, pp. 267 and
  873; (38) E.R. v. Schweidler, S., 113, p. 1433; (39) S., 111, July
  1902; (40) _Veröffentl. des Kg. Preuss. Met. Inst._, 1904; (41) P.Z.,
  vol. 5, p. 106; (42) S., 114, p. 198; (43) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 871; (44)
  P.Z., vol. 4, p. 93; (45) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, p. 229; (46) S., 114,
  p. 1705; (47) S., 114, p. 399; (48) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 522; (49) S.,
  113, p. 1455; (50) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 627; (51) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 90;
  (52) S., 114, p. 151; (53) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, p. 253; (54) P.Z.,
  vol. 5, p. 749; (55) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, pp. 53 and 339; (56) P.Z.,
  vol. 5, p. 11; (57) P.Z., vol. 5, p. 591; (58) T.M., vol. 9, 1904, p.
  49; (59) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 295; (60) P.Z., vol. 5, p. 504; (61) T.M.,
  vol. 10, 1905, p. 65; (62) S., 114, p. 1377; (63) _Camb. Phil. Soc.
  Proc._, vol. 13, p. 363; (64) _Trans. R.S. Edin._, vol. 39, p. 63, and
  vol. 40, p. 484; (65) _Q.J.R. Met. Soc._, vol. 24, 1898, p. 31; (66)
  M.Z., vol. 11, 1894, p. 277; (67) _Jahrbücher der Konigl. Ung.
  Reichsanstalt für Met. und Erdmag._, vol. 33, 1903, III. Theil with
  appendix by L. von Szalay; (68) U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, _Weather
  Bureau Bulletin_, No. 30, 1901; (69) M.Z., vol. 19, 1902, p. 297; (70)
  _Q.J.R. Met. Soc._, vol. 15, 1889, p. 140; (71) M.Z., vol. 20, 1903,
  p. 227; (72) M.Z., vol. 20, 1903, p. 522; (73) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, p.
  367; (74) M.Z., vol. 22, 1905, p. 175; (75) J. Hegyfoky, M.Z., vol.
  20, 1903, p. 218; (76) M.Z., vol. 22, 1905, p. 575; (77) S. Arrhenius,
  M.Z., vol. 5, 1888, p. 348; (78) G. Hellmann, M.Z., vol. 22, 1905, p.
  223; (79) M.Z., vol. 11, 1894, p. 239; (80) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, p.
  468; (81) _Berlin Sitz._, 1889, No. 16; (82) A.J. Henry, _U.S. Dept.
  of Agriculture Bull._, No. 26, 1899; (83) M.Z., vol. 16, 1899, p. 128;
  (84) _K. Sven. Vet. Akad. Hand._, Bd. 19, No. 8, Bd. 20, No. 6, Bd.
  31, Nos. 2 and 3; (85) M.Z., vol. 11, 1894, p. 230; (86) _Nature_,
  vol. 65, 1902, p. 367; (87) M.Z., vol. 8, 1891, p. 321; (88) _Brit.
  Assoc. Report_ for 1898, p. 808, also _Electricity in Agriculture and
  Horticulture_ (London, 1904).     (C. Ch.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] see _Authorities_ below.