ATRIUM (either from _ater_, black, referring to the blackening of the
walls from the smoke of the hearth, or from the Greek [Greek: aethrion],
open to the sky, or from an Etruscan town, Atria, where the style of
building is supposed to have originated), the principal entrance hall or
court of a Roman dwelling, giving access and light to the rooms round
it. The centre of the roof over the atrium was open to the sky and
called the _compluvium_; the rain-water from the roof collected in the
gutters was discharged into a marble tank underneath, which was known as
the _impluvium_. In the early periods of Roman civilization the atrium
was the common public apartment, and was used for the reception of
visitors and clients, and for ordinary domestic purposes, as cooking and
dining. In it were placed the ancestral pictures, the marriage-couch,
the hearth and generally a small altar. At a somewhat later period, and
among the wealthy, separate apartments were built for kitchens and
dining-rooms, and the atrium was kept as a general reception-room for
clients and visitors. There were many varieties of the atrium, depending
on the way in which the roof was carried. These are described by
Vitruvius under the title of _cavaedium_.

Other buildings, both consecrated and unconsecrated, were called by the
term (corresponding to the English "hall"), such as the Atrium Vestae,
where the vestal virgins lived, and the Atrium Libertatis, the residence
of the censor, where Asinius Pollio established the first public library
at Rome.

The word _atrium_ in Rome had a second signification, being given to an
open court with porticos round, sometimes placed in front of a temple. A
similar arrangement was adopted by the early Christians with relation to
the Basilica, in front of which there was an open court surrounded by
colonnades or arcades. The church of San Clemente at Rome, that of Sant'
Ambrogio at Milan and the cathedral of Parenzo in Istria still retain
their atria.