ATTERBOM, PER DANIEL AMADEUS (1790-1855), Swedish poet, son of a country
parson, was born in the province of Östergötland on the 19th of January
1790. He studied in the university of Upsala from 1805 to 1815, and
became professor of philosophy there in 1828. He was the first great
poet of the romantic movement which, inaugurated by the critical work of
Lorenzo Hammersköld, was to revolutionize Swedish literature. In 1807,
when in his seventeenth year, he founded at Upsala an artistic society,
called the Aurora League, the members of which included V.F. Palmblad,
A.A. Grafström (d. 1870), Samuel Hedborn (d. 1849), and other youths
whose names were destined to take a foremost rank in the literature of
their generation. Their first newspaper, _Polyfem_, was a crude effort,
soon abandoned, but in 1810 there began to appear a journal, _Fosforos_,
edited by Atterbom, which lasted for three years and finds a place in
classic Swedish literature. It consisted entirely of poetry and
aesthetico-polemical essays; it introduced the study of the newly arisen
Romantic school of Germany, and formed a vehicle for the early works,
not of Atterbom only, but of Hammersköld, Dahlgren, Palmblad and others.
Later, the members of the Aurora League established the _Poetisk
Kalender_ (1812-1822), in which their poems appeared, and a new critical
organ, _Svensk Litteraturtidning_ (1813-1824). Among Atterbom's
independent works the most celebrated is _Lycksalighetens Ö_ (_The
Fortunate Island_), a romantic drama of extraordinary beauty, published
in 1823. Before this he had published a somewhat in the manner of
Novalis. Of a dramatized fairy tale, _Fågel blå (The Blue Bird_), only a
fragment, which is among the most exquisite of his writings, is
preserved. As a purely lyrical poet he has not been excelled in Sweden,
but his more ambitious works are injured by his weakness for allegory
and symbolism, and his consistent adoption of the mannerisms of Tieck
and Novalis. In his later years he became less violent in literary
controversy. He became in 1835 professor of aesthetics and literature at
Upsala, and four years later he was admitted to the Swedish Academy. He
died on the 21st of July 1855. His _Svenska Siare och Skalder_ (6 vols.,
1841-1855, supplement, 1864) consists of a series of biographies of
Swedish poets and men of letters, which forms a valuable history of
Swedish letters down to the end of the "classical" period. Atterbom's
works were collected (13 vols., Örebro) in 1854-1870.