ATTOCK, a town and fort of British India, in the Rawalpindi district of
the Punjab, 47 m. by rail from Peshawar, and situated on the eastern
bank of the Indus. Pop. (1901) 2822. The place is of both political and
commercial importance, as the Indus is here crossed by the military and
trade route through the Khyber Pass into Afghanistan. Alexander the
Great, Tamerlane and Nadir Shah are believed to have successively
crossed the Indus at or about this spot in their respective invasions of
India. The river runs past Attock in a deep rapid channel about 200 yds.
broad, but is easily crossed in boats or on inflated skins of oxen. The
rocky gorges through which it flows, with a distant view of the Hindu
Kush, form some of the finest scenery in the world. In 1883 an iron
girder bridge of five spans was opened, which carries the North-Western
railway to Peshawar, and has also a subway for wheeled traffic and foot
passengers. The fort of Attock was built by the emperor Akbar in 1581,
on a low hillock beside the river. The walls are of polished stone, and
the whole structure is handsome; but from a military point of view it is
of little importance, being commanded by a hill, from which it is
divided only by a ravine. On the opposite side of the river is the
village of Khairabad, with a fort, also erected by Akbar according to
some, or by Nadir Shah according to others. The military importance of
Attock has diminished, but it still has a small detachment of British
troops.