ATWOOD, GEORGE (1746-1807), English mathematician, was born in the early
part of the year 1746. He entered Westminster school, and in 1759 was
elected to a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge. He graduated in
1769, with the rank of third wrangler and first Smith's prizeman.
Subsequently he became a fellow and a tutor of the college, and in 1776
was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London. In the year 1784 he
left Cambridge, and soon afterwards received from William Pitt the
office of a patent searcher of the customs, which required but little
attendance, and enabled him to devote a considerable portion of his time
to his special studies. He died in July 1807. Atwood's published works,
exclusive of papers contributed to the _Philosophical Transactions_, for
one of which he obtained the Copley medal, are as follows:--_Analysis of
a Course of Lectures on the Principles of Natural Philosophy_
(Cambridge, 1784); _Treatise on the Rectilinear Motion and Rotation of
Bodies_ (Cambridge, 1784), which gives some interesting experiments, by
means of which mechanical truths can be ocularly exhibited and
demonstrated, and describes the machine, since called by Atwood's name,
for verifying experimentally the laws of simple acceleration of motion;
_Review of the Statutes and Ordinances of Assize which have been
established in England from the 4th year of King John, 1202, to the 37th
of his present Majesty_ (London, 1801), a work of some historical
research; _Dissertation on the Construction and Properties of Arches_
(London, 1801), with supplement, pt. i., 1801, pt. ii., 1804, an
elaborate work, now completely superseded.