AUBER, DANIEL FRANÇOIS ESPRIT (1782-1871), French musical composer, the
son of a Paris printseller, was born at Caen in Normandy on the 29th of
January 1782. Destined by his father to the pursuits of trade, he was
allowed, nevertheless, to indulge his fondness for music, and learnt to
play at an early age on several instruments, his first teacher being the
Tirolean composer, I.A. Ladurner. Sent at the age of twenty to London to
complete his business training, he was obliged to leave England in
consequence of the breach of the treaty of Amiens (1804). He had already
attempted musical composition, and at this period produced several
_concertos pour basse_, in the manner of the violoncellist, Lamarre, in
whose name they were published. The praise given to his concerto for the
violin, which was played at the Conservatoire by Mazas, encouraged him
to undertake the resetting of the old comic opera, _Julie_ (1811).
Conscious by this time of the need of regular study of his chosen art,
he placed himself under the severe training of Cherubini, by which the
special qualities of the young composer were admirably developed. In
1813 he made his _début_ in an opera in one act, the _Séjour militaire_,
the unfavourable reception of which put an end for some years to his
attempts as composer. But the failure in business and death of his
father, in 1819, compelled him once more to turn to music, and to make
that which had been his pastime the serious employment of his life. He
produced another opera, the _Testament et les billets-deux_ (1819),
which was no better received than the former. But he persevered, and the
next year was rewarded by the complete success of his _Bergère
châtelaine_, an opera in three acts. This was the first in a long series
of brilliant successes. In 1822 began his long association with A.E.
Scribe, who shared with him, as librettist, the success and growing
popularity of his compositions. The opera of _Leicester_, in which they
first worked together (1823), is remarkable also as showing evidences of
the influence of Rossini. But his own style was an individual one,
marked by lightness and facility, sparkling vivacity, grace and
elegance, clear and piquant melody--characteristically French. In _La
Muette de Portici_, familiarly known as _Masaniello_, Auber achieved his
greatest musical triumph. Produced at Paris in 1828, it rapidly became a
European favourite, and its overture, songs and choruses were everywhere
heard. The duet, "Amour sacré de la patrie," was welcomed like a new
_Marseillaise_; sung by Nourrit at Brussels in 1830, it became the
signal for the revolution which broke out there. Of Auber's remaining
operas (about 50 in all) the more important are: _Le Maçon_ (1825), _La
Fiancée_ (1829), _Fra Diavolo_ (1830), _Lestocq_ (1834), _Le Cheval de
bronze_ (1835), _L'Ambassadrice_ (1836), _Le Domino noir_ (1837), _Le
Lac des fées_ (1839), _Les Diamants de la couronne_ (1841), _Haydée_
(1847), _Marco Spada_ (1853), _Manon Lescaut_ (1856), and _La Fiancée du
roi des Garbes_ (1864). Official and other dignities testified the
public appreciation of Auber's works. In 1829 he was elected member of
the Institute, in 1830 he was named director of the court concerts, and
in 1842, at the wish of Louis Philippe, he succeeded Cherubini as
director of the Conservatoire. He was also a member of the Legion of
Honour from 1825, and attained the rank of commander in 1847. Napoleon
III. made Auber his Imperial Maître de Chapelle in 1857.

One of Auber's latest compositions was a march, written for the opening
of the International Exhibition in London in 1862. His fascinating
manners, his witty sayings, and his ever-ready kindness and beneficence
won for him a secure place in the respect and love of his
fellow-citizens. He remained in his old home during the German siege of
Paris, 1870-71, but the miseries of the Communist war which followed
sickened his heart, and he died in Paris on the 13th of May 1871.

  See Adolph Kohut, "Auber," vol. xvii. of _Musiker Biographien_
  (Leipzig, 1895).