AUBIGNAC, FRANÇOIS HÉDELIN, ABBÉ D' (1604-1676), French author, was born
at Paris on the 4th of August 1604. His father practised at the Paris
bar, and his mother was a daughter of the great surgeon Ambroise Paré.
François Hédelin was educated for his father's profession, but, after
practising for some time at Nemours he abandoned law, took holy orders,
and was appointed tutor to one of Richelieu's nephews, the duc de
Fronsac. This patronage secured for him the abbey of Aubignac and of
Mainac. The death of the duc de Fronsac in 1646 put an end to hopes of
further preferment, and the Abbé d'Aubignac retired to Nemours,
occupying himself with literature till his death on the 25th of July
1676. He took an energetic share in the literary controversies of his
time. Against Gilles Ménage he wrote a _Térence justifié_ (1656); he
laid claim to having originated the idea of the "_Carte de tendre_" of
Mlle de Scudéry's _Clélie_; and after being a professed admirer of
Corneille he turned against him because he had neglected to mention the
abbé in his _Discours sur le poème dramatique_. He was the author of
four tragedies: _La Cyminde_ (1642), _La Pucelle d'Orléans_ (1642),
_Zénobie_ (1647) and _Le Martyre de Sainte Catherine_ (1650). _Zénobie_
was written with the intention of affording a model in which the strict
rules of the drama, as understood by the theorists, were observed. In
the choice of subjects for his plays, he seems to have been guided by a
desire to illustrate the various kinds of tragedy--patriotic, antique
and religious. The dramatic authors whom he was in the habit of
criticizing were not slow to take advantage of the opportunity for
retaliation offered by the production of these mediocre plays. It is as
a theorist that D'Aubignac still arrests attention. It has been proved
that to Jean Chapelain belongs the credit of having been the first to
establish as a practical law the convention of the unities that plays
so large a part in the history of the French stage; but the laws of
dramatic method and construction generally were codified by d'Aubignac
in his _Pratique du théâtre._ The book was only published in 1657, but
had been begun at the desire of Richelieu as early as 1640. His
_Conjectures académiques sur l'Iliade d'Homère_, which was not published
until nearly forty years after his death, threw doubts on the existence
of Homer, and anticipated in some sense the conclusions of Friedrich
August Wolf in his _Prolegomena ad Homerum_ (1795).

  The contents of the _Pratique du théâtre_ are summarized by F.
  Brunetière in his notice of Aubignac in the _Grande Encydopédie._ See
  also G. Saintsbury, _Hist. of Criticism_, bk. v., and H. Rigault,
  _Hist. de la querelle des anciens et modernes._ (1859).