AUCHTERARDER (Gaelic, "upper high land"), a police burgh of Perthshire,
Scotland, 13¾ m. S.W. of Perth by the Caledonian railway. Pop. (1901)
2276. It is situated on Ruthven Water, a right-hand tributary of the
Earn. The chief manufactures are those of tartans and other woollens,
and of agricultural implements. At the beginning of the 13th century it
obtained a charter from the earl of Strathearn, afterwards became a
royal burgh for a period, and was represented in the Scottish
parliament. Its castle, now ruinous, was built as a hunting-lodge for
Malcolm Canmore, but of the abbey which it possessed as early as the
reign of Alexander II. (1198-1249) no remains exist. The ancient church
of St Mungo, now in ruins, was a building in the Norman or Early Pointed
style. The town was almost entirely burned down by the earl of Mar in
1716 during the abortive Jacobite rising. It was in connexion with this
parish that the ecclesiastical dispute arose which led to the disruption
in the Church of Scotland in 1843. The estate of Kincardine, 1 m. south,
gives the title of earl of Kincardine to the duke of Montrose. The old
castle, now in ruins, was dismantled in 1645 by the marquis of Argyll in
retaliation for the destruction of Castle Campbell in Dollar Glen on the
south side of the Ochils. The old ruined castle of Tullibardine, 2 m
west of the burgh, once belonged to the Murrays of Tullibardine,
ancestors of the duke of Atholl, who derives the title of marquis of
Tullibardine from the estate. The ancient chapel adjoining, also
ruinous, was a burial-place of the Murrays.