AUCHMUTY, SIR SAMUEL (1756-1822), British general, was born at New York
in 1756, and served as a loyalist in the American War of Independence,
being given an ensigncy in the royal army in 1777, and in 1778 a
lieutenancy in the 45th Foot, without purchase. When his regiment
returned to England after the war, having neither private means nor
influence, he exchanged into the 52nd, in order to proceed to India. He
took part in the last war against Hyder Ali; he was given a staff
appointment by Lord Cornwallis in 1790, served in the operations against
Tippoo Sahib, and continued in various staff appointments up to 1797,
when he returned to England a brevet lieut.-colonel. In 1800 he was made
lieut.-colonel and brevet colonel; and in the following year, as
adjutant-general to Sir David Baird in Egypt, took a distinguished share
in the march across the desert and the capture of Alexandria. On his
return to England in 1803 he was knighted, and three years later he went
out to the River Plate as a brigadier-general. Auchmuty was one of the
few officers who came out of the disastrous Buenos Aires expedition of
1806-7 with enhanced reputation. While General Whitelocke, the
commander, was cashiered, Auchmuty was at once re-employed and promoted
major-general, and was sent out in 1810 to command at Madras. In the
following year he commanded the expedition organized for the conquest of
Java, which the governor-general, Lord Minto, himself accompanied. The
storming of the strongly fortified position of Meester Cornelis (28th
August 1811), stubbornly defended by the Dutch garrison under General
Janssens, practically achieved the conquest of the island, and after the
action of Samarang (September 8th) Janssens surrendered. Auchmuty
received the thanks of parliament and the order of K.C.B. (G.C.B. in
1815), and in 1813, on his return home, was promoted to the rank of
lieut.-general. In 1821 he became commander-in-chief in Ireland, and a
member of the Irish privy council. He died suddenly on the 11th of
August 1822.