AUCKLAND, WILLIAM EDEN, 1ST BARON (1745-1814), English statesman, son of
Sir Robert Eden, 3rd Bart., of Windlestone Hall, Durham, and of Mary,
daughter of William Davison, was born in 1745, educated at Eton and
Christ Church, Oxford, and called to the bar at the Middle Temple in
1768. In 1771 he published _Principles of Penal Law_, and was early
recognized as an authority on commercial and economic questions, and in
1772 he was appointed an under secretary of state. He represented New
Woodstock in the parliaments of 1774 and 1780, and Heytesbury in those
of 1784 and 1790. In 1776 he was appointed a commissioner on the board
of trade and plantations. In 1778 he carried an act for the improvement
of the treatment of prisoners, and accompanied the earl of Carlisle as a
commissioner to North America on an unsuccessful mission to settle the
disputes with the colonists. On his return in 1779 he published his
widely read _Four Letters to the Earl of Carlisle_, and in 1780 became
chief secretary for Ireland. He was elected to the Irish House of
Commons as member for Dungannon in 1781 and sworn of the Irish privy
council, and while in Ireland established the National Bank. He advised
the increase of the secret service fund, and was reputed, according to
Lord Charlemont (a political opponent), as especially skilful in the
arts of corruption and in overcoming political prejudices. He resigned
in 1782, but in the following year he took office again as
vice-treasurer of Ireland under the coalition ministry, which he had
been instrumental in arranging, and was included in the privy council,
resigning with the government in December. He opposed strongly Pitt's
propositions for free trade between England and Ireland in 1785, but
took office with Pitt as a member of the committee on trade and
plantations, and negotiated in 1786 and 1787 Pitt's important commercial
treaty with France, and agreements concerning the East India Companies
and Holland. In 1787 he published his _History of New Holland_. Next
year he was sent as ambassador to Spain, and after his return was
created (September 1789) Baron Auckland in the Irish peerage. The same
year he was sent on a mission to Holland, and represented English
interests there with great zeal and prudence during the critical years
of 1790 to 1793, obtaining the assistance of the Dutch fleet in 1790 on
the menace of a war with Spain, signing the convention relating to the
Netherlands the same year, and in 1793 attending the congress at
Antwerp. He retired from the public service in the latter year, received
a pension of £2300, and was created Baron Auckland of West Auckland,
Durham, in the English peerage. During his retirement in the country at
Beckenham, he continued his intimacy with Pitt, his nearest neighbour at
Holwood, who at one time had thoughts of marrying his daughter; and with
Pitt's sanction he published his _Remarks on the Apparent Cicumstances
of the War_ in 1795, to prepare public opinion for a peace. In 1798 he
was included in Pitt's government as joint postmaster-general, and
supported strongly the income tax and the Irish Union, assisting in
drawing up the act embodying the latter. In 1799 he brought in a bill to
check adultery by preventing the marriage of the guilty parties, and the
same year took a mischievous part in the cabal against Sir Ralph
Abercromby. He severely criticized Pitt's resignation in 1801, from
which he had endeavoured to dissuade him, and retained office under
Addington. This terminated his friendship with Pitt, who excluded him
from his administration in 1804 though he increased his pension.
Auckland was included in Granville's ministry of "All the Talents" as
president of the board of trade in 1806. He held the appointments of
auditor and director of Greenwich hospital, recorder of Grantham, and
chancellor of the Marischal College in Aberdeen. He died on the 28th of
May 1814.

He had married in 1776 Eleanor, sister of the first Lord Minto, and had
a large family. Emily Eden (1797-1869), the novelist, was one of his
daughters. On the death of his son George, 2nd baron and earl of
Auckland (q.v.), the barony passed to the 1st baron's younger son Robert
John (1790-1870), bishop of Bath and Wells, from whom the later barons
were descended, and who was also the father of Sir Ashley Eden
(1831-1887), lieutenant-governor of Bengal. The 1st baron had two
distinguished brothers--Morton Eden (1752-1830), a diplomatist, who
married Lady Elizabeth Henley, and in 1799 was created 1st Baron Henley
(his family, from 1831, taking the name of Henley instead of Eden); and
Sir Robert Eden, governor of Maryland, whose son, Sir Frederic Morton
Eden (1766-1809), was a well-known economist.

  Lord Auckland's _Journal and Correspondence_, published in 1861-1862,
  throws much light on the political history of the time.