AUDIENCE (from Lat. _audire_, to hear), the act or state of hearing, the
term being therefore transferred to those who hear or listen, as in a
theatre, at a concert or meeting. In a more technical sense, the term is
applied to the right of access to the sovereign enjoyed by the peers of
the realm individually and by the House of Commons collectively. More
particularly it means the ceremony of the admission of ambassadors,
envoys or others to an interview with a sovereign or an important
official for the purpose of presenting their credentials. In France,
_audience_ is the term applied to the sitting of a law court for hearing
actions. In Spain, _audiencia_ is the name given to certain tribunals
which try appeals from minor courts. The Spanish judges were originally
known as _oidores_, hearers, from the Spanish _oir_, to hear; but they
are now called _ministros_, or _magistrados togados_, robed judges, as
the gown of the Spanish judge is called a _toga_. The _audiencia
pretorial_, i.e. of the praetor, was a court in Spanish America from
which there was no appeal to the viceroy, but only to the council of
the Indies in Spain. It is not the custom in Spain to speak of
_audiencias reales_, royal courts, but of the _audiencias del Reino_,
courts of the kingdom.

In England the _Audience-court_ was an ecclesiastical court, held by the
archbishops of Canterbury and York, in which they once exercised a
considerable part of their jurisdiction, dealing with such matters as
they thought fit to reserve for their own hearing. It has been long
disused and is now merged in the court of arches.