AUDLEY, or AUDELEY, SIR JAMES (c. 1316-1386), one of the original
knights, or founders, of the order of the Garter, was the eldest son of
Sir James Audley of Stratton Audley in Oxfordshire. When the order of
the Garter was founded, he was instituted as one of the first founders,
and his stall in St George's chapel, Windsor, was the eleventh on the
side of Edward, the Black Prince. He appears to have served in France in
1346, and in August 1350 took part in the naval fight off Sluys. When
hostilities were renewed between England and France in 1354 Sir James
was in constant attendance upon the Black Prince, and earned a great
reputation for valour. At the battle of Poitiers on the 19th of
September 1356 he took his stand in front of the English army, and after
fighting for a long time was severely wounded and carried from the
fight. After the victory, the prince inquired for Sir James, who was
brought to the royal tent, where Edward told him he had been the bravest
knight on his side, and granted him an annuity of five hundred marks.
Sir James made over this gift to the four esquires who had attended him
during the battle, and received from the prince a further pension of six
hundred marks. In 1359 he was one of the leaders of an expedition into
France, in 1360 he took the fortress of Chaven in Brittany, and was
present at Calais when peace was made between England and France in
October 1360. He was afterwards governor of Aquitaine and great
seneschal of Poitou, and took part in the capture of the town of La
Roche-sur-Yon by Edmund, earl of Cambridge. He died in 1386 at
Fontenay-le-Comte, where he had gone to reside, and was buried at
Poitiers.

  See Jean Froissart, _Chronigues_, translated by T. Johnes (Hafod,
  1810); G.F. Beltz, _Memorials of the Most Noble Order of the Garter_
  (London, 1841).