AUDREHEM, ARNOUL D' (c. 1305-1370), French soldier, was born at
Audrehem, in the present department of Pas de Calais, near St Omer.
Nothing is known of his career before 1332, when he is heard of at the
court of the king of France. Between 1335 and 1342 he went three times
to Scotland to aid King David Bruce in his wars. In 1342 he became
captain for the king of France in Brittany; then he seems to have served
in the household of the duke of Normandy, and in 1346, as one of the
main defenders of Calais, was taken as a prisoner to England by Edward
III. From 1349 he holds an important place in the military history of
France, first as captain in Angoulême, and from June 1351, in succession
to the lord of Beaujeu, as marshal of France. In March 1352 he was
appointed lieutenant for the king in the territory between the Loire and
the Dordogne, in June 1353 in Normandy, and in 1355 in Artois, Picardy
and the Boulonnais. It was Audrehem who arrested Charles the Bad, king
of Navarre, and his partisans, at the banquet given by the dauphin at
Rouen in 1356. At Poitiers he was one of those who advised King John to
attack the English, and, charging in the front line of the French army,
was slightly wounded and taken prisoner. From England he was several
times given safe-conducts to France, and he took an active part in the
negotiations for the treaty of Bretigny, recovering his liberty the same
time as King John. In 1361, as the king's lieutenant in Languedoc, he
prevented the free companies from seizing the castles, and negotiated
the treaty with their chiefs under which they followed Henry, count of
Trastamara (later Henry II. of Castile), into Spain. In 1365 he himself
joined du Guesclin in the expedition to Spain, was taken prisoner with
him by the Black Prince at the battle of Najera (1367), and was unable
to pay his ransom until 1369. In 1368, on account of his age, he was
relieved of the office of marshal, being appointed bearer of the
oriflamme, with a pension of 2000 livres. He was sent to Spain in 1370
by Charles V., to urge his friend du Guesclin to return to France, and
in spite of his age he took part in the battle of Pontvallain (December
1370), but fell ill and died, probably at Saumur, in the latter part of
December 1370.

  See Émile Molinier, "Étude sur la vie d'Arnoul d'Audrehem, maréchal de
  France," in _Mémoires présentés par divers savants à l'académie des
  inscriptions et belles-lettres_, 2^e série, iv. (1883).