AUDRAN, EDMOND (1842-1901), French musical composer, was born at Lyons
on the 11th of April 1842. He studied music at the École Niedermeyer,
where he won the prize for composition in 1859. Two years later he
accepted the post of organist of the church of St Joseph at Marseilles.
He made his first appearance as a dramatic composer at Marseilles with
_L'Ours et le Pacha_ (1862), a musical version of one of Scribe's
vaudevilles. This was followed by _La Chercheuse d'Esprit_ (1864), a
comic opera, also produced at Marseilles. Audran wrote a funeral march
on the death of Meyerbeer, which was performed with some success, and
made various attempts to win fame as a writer of sacred music. He
produced a mass (Marseilles, 1873), an oratorio, _La Sulamite_
(Marseilles, 1876), and numerous minor works, but he is known almost
entirely as a composer of the lighter forms of opera. His first Parisian
success was made with _Les Noces d'Olivette_ (1879), a work which
speedily found its way to London and (as _Olivette_) ran for more than a
year at the Strand theatre (1880-1881). Audran's music has, in fact, met
with as much favour in England as in France, and all save a few of his
works have been given in a more or less adapted form in London theatres.
Besides those already mentioned, the following have been the most
undeniably successful of Audran's many comic operas: _Le Grand Mogol_
(Marseilles, 1876; Paris, 1884; London, as _The Grand Mogul_, 1884), _La
Mascotte_ (Paris, 1880; London, as _The Mascotte_, 1881), _Gillette de
Narbonne_ (Paris, 1882; London, as _Gillette_, 1883), _La Cigale et la
Fourmi_ (Paris, 1886; London, as _La Cigale_, 1890), _Miss Hélyett_
(Paris, 1890; London, as _Miss Decima_ 1891), _La Poupée_ (Paris, 1896;
London, 1897). Audran was one of the best of the successors of
Offenbach. He had little of Offenbach's humour, but his music is
distinguished by an elegance and a refinement of manner which lift it
above the level of opéra bouffe to the confines of genuine opéra
comique. He was a fertile if not a very original melodist, and his
orchestration is full of variety, without being obtrusive or vulgar.
Many of his operas, _La Mascotte_ in particular, reveal a degree of
musicianship which is rarely associated with the ephemeral productions
of the lighter stage. He died in Paris on the 16th of August 1901.