AUDUBON, JOHN JAMES (1780-1851), American naturalist, is said to have
been born on the 5th of May 1780 in Louisiana, his father being a French
naval officer and his mother a Spanish Creole. He was educated in Paris,
where he had lessons from the painter, J.L. David. Returning to America
in 1798 he settled on a farm near Philadelphia, and gave himself up to
the study of natural history, and especially to drawing birds. In 1826
he went to England in the hope of getting his drawings published, and by
the following year he had obtained sufficient subscribers to enable him
to begin the publication of his _Birds of America_, which on its
completion in 1838 consisted of 435 coloured plates, containing 1055
figures of birds the size of life. Cuvier called it "le plus magnifique
monument que l'art ait encore élevé à la nature." The descriptive matter
to accompany the plates appeared at Edinburgh in 5 vols. from 1831 to
1839 under the title of _American Ornithological Biography._ During the
publication of these works Audubon divided his time between Great
Britain and America, devoting his leisure to expeditions to various
parts of the United States and Canada for the purpose of collecting new
material. In 1842 he bought an estate on the Hudson, now Audubon Park in
New York City. In 1844 he published in America a popular octavo edition
of his _Birds of America._ He also took up the preparation of a new
work, _The Quadrupeds of America_, with the collaboration of John
Bachman, the publication of which was begun in New York in 1846 and
finished in 1853-1854. He died at New York on the 27th of January 1851.

  See ORNITHOLOGY; also _Audubon and his Journals_ (1897), by his
  grand-daughter Maria R. Audubon, with notes by Elliot Coues.