AUERBACH, BERTHOLD (1812-1882), German novelist, was born on the 28th of
February 1812 at Nordstetten in the Württemberg Black Forest. His
parents were Jews, and he was intended for the ministry; but after
studying philosophy at Tübingen, Munich and Heidelberg, and becoming
estranged from Jewish orthodoxy by the study of Spinoza, he devoted
himself to literature. He made a fortunate beginning in a romance on the
life of Spinoza (1837), so interesting in itself, and so close in its
adherence to fact, that it may be read with equal advantage as a novel
or as a biography. _Dichter und Kaufmann_ followed in 1839, and a
translation of Spinoza's works in 1841, when Auerbach turned to the
class of fiction which has made him famous, the _Schwarzwälder
Dorfgeschichten_ (1843), stories of peasant life in the Black Forest. In
these, as well as in _Barfüssele_ (1856), _Edelweiss_ (1861), and other
novels of greater compass, he depicts the life of the south German
peasant as "Jeremias Gotthelf" (Albrecht Bitzius) had painted the
peasantry of Switzerland, but in a less realistic spirit. When this vein
was exhausted Auerbach returned to his first phase as a philosophical
novelist, producing _Auf der Höhe_ (1865), _Das Landhaus am Rhein_
(1869), and other romances of profound speculative tendencies, turning
on plots invented by himself. With the exception of _Auf der Höhe_,
these works did not enjoy much popularity, and suffer from lack of form
and concentration. Auerbach's fame continues to rest upon his
_Dorfgeschichten_, although the celebrity of even these has been
impaired by the growing demand for a more uncompromising realism.
Auerbach died at Cannes on the 8th of February 1882.

  The first collected edition of Auerbach's _Schriften_ appeared in 22
  vols. in 1863-1864; the best edition is in 18 vols. (1892-1895).
  Auerbach's _Briefe an seinen Freund J. Auerbach_ (with a preface by F.
  Spielhagen) were published in 2 vols. (1884). See E. Zabel, _B.
  Auerbach_ (1882); and E. Lasker, _B. Auerbach, ein Gedenkblatt_
  (1882).