AUERSPERG, ANTON ALEXANDER, GRAF VON (1806-1876), Austrian poet, who
wrote under the pseudonym of ANASTASIUS GRÜN, was born on the 11th of
April 1806, at Laibach, the capital of the Austrian duchy of Carniola,
and was head of the Thurn-am-Hart branch of the Carniolan cadet line of
the house of Auersperg. He received his university education first at
Graz and then at Vienna, where he studied jurisprudence. In 1830 he
succeeded to his ancestral property, and in 1832 appeared as a member of
the estates of Carniola on the _Herrenbank_ of the diet at Laibach. Here
he distinguished himself by his outspoken criticism of the Austrian
government, leading the opposition of the duchy to the exactions of the
central power. In 1832 the title of "imperial chamberlain" was conferred
upon him, and in 1839 he married Maria, daughter of Count Attems. After
the revolution of 1848 at Vienna he represented the district of Laibach
at the German national assembly at Frankfort-on-the-Main, to which he
tried in vain to persuade his Slovene compatriots to send
representatives. After a few months, however, disgusted with the violent
development of the revolution, he resigned his seat, and again retired
into private life. In 1860 he was summoned to the remodelled _Reichsrat_
by the emperor, who next year nominated him a life member of the
Austrian upper house (_Herrenhaus_), where, while remaining a keen
upholder of the German centralized empire, as against the federalism of
Slavs and Magyars, he greatly distinguished himself as one of the most
intrepid and influential supporters of the cause of liberalism, in both
political and religious matters, until his death at Graz on the 12th of
September 1876.

Count Auersperg's first publication, a collection of lyrics, _Blätter
der Liebe_ (1830), showed little originality; but his second production,
_Der letzte Ritter_ (1830), brought his genius to light. It celebrates
the deeds and adventures of the emperor Maximilian I. (1493-1519) in a
cycle of poems written in the strophic form of the _Nibelungenlied_. But
Auersperg's fame rests almost exclusively on his political poetry; two
collections entitled _Spaziergänge eines Wiener Poeten_ (1831) and
_Schutt_ (1835) created a sensation in Germany by their originality and
bold liberalism. These two books, which are remarkable not merely for
their outspoken opinions, but also for their easy versification and
powerful imagery, were the forerunners of the German political poetry of
1840-1848. His _Gedichte_ (1837), if anything, increased his reputation;
his epics, _Die Nibelungen im Frack_ (1843) and _Der Pfaff vom
Kahlenberg_ (1850), are characterized by a fine ironic humour. He also
produced masterly translations of the popular Slovenic songs current in
Carniola (_Volkslieder aus Krain_, 1850), and of the English poems
relating to "Robin Hood" (1864).

  Anastasius Grün's _Gesammelte Werke_ were published by L.A. Frankl in
  5 vols. (Berlin, 1877); his _Briefwechsel mit L.A. Frankl_ (Berlin,
  1897). A selection of his _Politische Reden und Schriften_ has been
  published by S. Hock (Vienna, 1906). See P. von Radics, _Anastasius
  Grün_ (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1879).