AUGIER, GUILLAUME VICTOR ÉMILE (1820-1889), French dramatist, was born
at Valence, Drôme, on the 17th of September 1820. He was the grandson of
Pigault Lebrun, and belonged to the well-to-do _bourgeoisie_ in
principles and in thought as well as by actual birth. He received a good
education and studied for the bar. In 1844 he wrote a play in two acts
and in verse, _La Ciguë_, refused at the Théâtre Français, but produced
with considerable success at the Odéon. This settled his career.
Thenceforward, at fairly regular intervals, either alone or in
collaboration with other writers--Jules Sandeau, Eugène-Marie Labiche,
Éd. Foussier--he produced plays which were in their way eventful. _Le
Fils de Giboyer_ (1862)--which was regarded as an attack on the clerical
party in France, and was only brought out by the direct intervention of
the emperor--caused some political excitement. His last comedy, _Les
Fourchambault_, belongs to the year 1879. After that date he wrote no
more, restrained by an honourable fear of producing inferior work. The
Academy had long before, on the 31st of March 1857, elected him to be
one of its members. He died in his house at Croissy on the 25th of
October 1889. Such, in briefest outline, is the story of a life which
Augier himself describes as "without incident"--a life in all senses
honourable. Augier, with Dumas _fils_ and Sardou, may be said to have
held the French stage during the Second Empire. The man respected
himself and his art, and his art on its ethical side--for he did not
disdain to be a teacher--has high qualities of rectitude and
self-restraint. Uprightness of mind and of heart, generous honesty, as
Jules Lemaitre well said, constituted the very soul of all his dramatic
work. _L'Aventurière_ (1848), the first of Augier's important works,
already shows a deviation from romantic models; and in the _Mariage
d'Olympe_ (1855) the courtesan is shown as she is, not glorified as in
Dumas's _Dame aux Camélias_. In _Gabrielle_ (1849) the husband, not the
lover, is the sympathetic, poetic character. In the _Lionnes pauvres_
(1858) the wife who sells her favours comes under the lash. Greed of
gold, social demoralization, ultramontanism, lust of power, these are
satirized in _Les Effrontés_ (1861), _Le Fils de Giboyer_ (1862),
_Contagion_, first announced under the title of _Le Baron d'Estrigaud_
(1866), _Lions et renards_ (1869)--which, with _Le Gendre de M. Poirier_
(1854), written in collaboration with Jules Sandeau, reach the
high-water mark of Augier's art; in _Philiberte_ (1853) he produced a
graceful and delicate drawing-room comedy; and in _Jean de Thommeray_,
acted in 1873 after the great reverses of 1870, the regenerating note of
patriotism rings high and clear. His last two dramas, _Madame Caverlet_
(1876) and _Les Fourchambault_ (1879), are problem plays. But it would
be unfair to suggest that Émile Augier was a preacher only. He was a
moralist in the great sense, the sense in which the term can be applied
to Molière and the great dramatists--a moralist because of his large and
sane outlook on life. Nor does the interest of his dramas depend on
elaborate plot. It springs from character and its evolution. His men and
women move as personality, that mysterious factor, dictates. They are
real, several of them typical. Augier's first drama, _La Ciguë_, belongs
to a time (1844) when the romantic drama was on the wane; and his almost
exclusively domestic range of subject scarcely lends itself to lyric
outbursts of pure poetry. But his verse, if not that of a great poet,
has excellent dramatic qualities, while the prose of his prose dramas is
admirable for directness, alertness, sinew and a large and effective
wit. Perhaps it wanted these qualities to enlist laughter on his side in
such a war as he waged against false passion and false sentiment.
     (F. T. M.)