AUGUSTI, JOHANN CHRISTIAN WILHELM (1772-1841), German theologian, born
at Eschenberga, near Gotha, was of Jewish descent, his grandfather
having been a converted rabbi. He was educated at the gymnasium at Gotha
and the university of Jena. At Jena he studied oriental languages, of
which he became professor there in 1803. Subsequently he became ordinary
professor of theology (1812), and for a time rector, at Breslau. In 1819
he was transferred to the university of Bonn, where he was made
professor primarius. In 1828 he was appointed chief member of the
consistorial council at Coblenz. Here he was afterwards made director of
the consistory. He died at Coblenz in 1841. Augusti had little sympathy
with the modern philosophical interpretations of dogma, and although he
took up a position of free criticism with regard to the Biblical
narratives, he held fast to the traditional faith. His works on theology
(_Dogmengeschichte_, 1805; 4th ed., 1835) are simple statements of fact;
they do not attempt a speculative treatment of their subjects. In 1809
he published in conjunction with W.M.L. de Wette a new translation of
the Old Testament. Mention should also be made of his _Grundriss einer
historischkritischen Einleitung ins Alte Testament_ (1806), his
_Exegetisches Handbuch des Alten Testaments_ (1797-1800), and his
edition of _Die Apokryphen des A. T._ (1804). In addition to these, his
most important writings are the _Denkwürdigkeiten aus der Christlichen
Archäologie_, 12 vols. (1817-1831), a partially digested mass of
materials, and the _Handbuch der Christ. Archäologie_, 3 vols.
(1836-1837), which gives the substance of the larger work in a more
compact and systematic form.