AUGUSTAN HISTORY, the name given to a collection of the biographies of
the Roman emperors from Hadrian to Carinus (A.D. 117-284). The work
professes to have been written during the reigns of Diocletian and
Constantine, and is to be regarded as the composition of six
authors,--Aelius Spartianus, Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius,
Vulcacius Gallicanus, Trebellius Pollio and Flavius Vopiscus--known as
Scriptores Historiae Augustae, writers of Augustan history. It is
generally agreed, however, that there is a large number of
interpolations in the work, which are referred to the reign of
Theodosius; and that the documents inserted in the lives are almost all
forgeries. The more advanced school of critics holds that the names of
the supposed authors are purely fictitious, as those of some of the
authorities which they profess to quote certainly are. The lives, which
(with few exceptions) are arranged in chronological order, are
distributed as follows:--To Spartianus: the biographies of Hadrian,
Aelius Verus, Didius Julianus, Septimius Severus, Pescennius Niger,
Caracallus, Geta (?); to Vulcacius Gallicanus: Avidius Cassius; to
Capitolinus: Antoninus Pius, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Verus, Pertinax,
Clodius Albinus, the two Maximins, the three Gordians, Maximus and
Balbinus, Opilius Macrinus (?); to Lampridius: Commodus, Diadumenus,
Elagabalus, Alexander Severus; to Pollio: the two Valerians, the
Gallieni, the so-called Thirty Tyrants or Usurpers, Claudius (his lives
of Philip, Decius, and Gallus being lost); to Vopiscus: Aurelian,
Tacitus, Florian, Probus, the four tyrants (Firmus, Saturninus,
Proculus, Bonosus), Carus, Numerian, Carinus.

The importance of the Augustan history as a repertory of information is
very considerable, but its literary pretensions are of the humblest
order. The writers' standard was confessedly low. "My purpose," says
Vopiscus, "has been to provide materials for persons more eloquent than
I." Considering the perverted taste of the age, it is perhaps fortunate
that the task fell into the hands of no showy declaimer who measured his
success by his skill in making surface do duty for substance, but of
homely, matter-of-fact scribes, whose sole concern was to record what
they knew. Their narrative is unmethodical and inartificial; their style
is tame and plebeian; their conception of biography is that of a
collection of anecdotes; they have no notion of arrangement, no measure
of proportion, and no criterion of discrimination between the important
and the trivial; they are equally destitute of critical and of
historical insight, unable to sift the authorities on which they rely,
and unsuspicious of the stupendous social revolution comprised within
the period which they undertake to describe. Their value, consequently,
depends very much on that of the sources to which they happen to have
recourse for any given period of history, and on the fidelity of their
adherence to these when valuable. Marius Maximus and Aelius Junius
Cordus, to whose qualifications they themselves bear no favourable
testimony, were their chief authorities for the earlier lives of the
series. Marius Maximus, who lived about 165-230, wrote biographies of
the emperors, in continuation of those of Suetonius, from Nerva to
Elagabalus; Junius Cordus dealt with the less-known emperors, perhaps
down to Maximus and Balbinus. The earlier lives, however, contain a
substratum of authentic historical fact, which recent critics have
supposed to be derived from a lost work by a contemporary writer,
described by one of these scholars as "the last great Roman historian."
For the later lives the Scriptores were obliged to resort more largely
to public records, and thus preserved matter of the highest importance,
rescuing from oblivion many imperial rescripts and senatorial decrees,
reports of official proceedings and speeches on public occasions, and a
number of interesting and characteristic letters from various emperors.
Their incidental allusions sometimes cast vivid though undesigned light
on the circumstances of the age, and they have made large contributions
to our knowledge of imperial jurisprudence in particular. Even their
trivialities have their use; their endless anecdotes respecting the
personal habits of the subjects of their biographies, if valueless to
the historian, are most acceptable to the archaeologist, and not
unimportant to the economist and moralist. Their errors and deficiencies
may in part be ascribed to the contemporary neglect of history as a
branch of instruction. Education was in the hands of rhetoricians and
grammarians; historians were read for their style, not for their matter,
and since the days of Tacitus, none had arisen worth a schoolmaster's
notice. We thus find Vopiscus acknowledging that when he began to write
the life of Aurelian, he was entirely misinformed respecting the
latter's competitor Firmus, and implying that he would not have ventured
on Aurelian himself if he had not had access to the MS. of the emperor's
own diary in the Ulpian library. The writers' historical estimates are
superficial and conventional, but report the verdict of public opinion
with substantial accuracy. The only imputation on the integrity of any
of them lies against Trebellius Pollio, who, addressing his work to a
descendant of Claudius, the successor and probably the assassin of
Gallienus, has dwelt upon the latter versatile sovereign's carelessness
and extravagance without acknowledgment of the elastic though fitful
energy he so frequently displayed in defence of the empire. The caution
of Vopiscus's references to Diocletian cannot be made a reproach to him.

No biographical particulars are recorded respecting any of these
writers. From their acquaintance with Latin and Greek literature they
must have been men of letters by profession, and very probably
secretaries or librarians to persons of distinction. There seems no
reason to accept Gibbon's contemptuous estimate of their social
position. They appear particularly versed in law. Spartianus's reference
to himself as "Diocletian's own" seems to indicate that he was a
domestic in the imperial household. They address their patrons with
deference, acknowledging their own deficiencies, and seem painfully
conscious of the profession of literature having fallen upon evil days.

  Editio princeps (Milan, 1475); Casaubon (1603) showed great critical
  ability in his notes, but for want of a good MS. left the restoration
  of the text to Salmasius (1620), whose notes are a most remarkable
  monument of erudition, combined with acuteness in verbal criticism and
  general vigour of intellect. Of recent years considerable attention
  has been devoted by German scholars to the _History_, especially by
  Peter, whose edition of the text in the Teubner series (2nd ed., 1884)
  contains (praef. xxxv.-xxxvii.) a bibliography of works on the subject
  preceding the publication of his own special treatise. The edition by
  Jordan-Eyssenhardt (1863) should also be mentioned. Amongst the most
  recent treatises on the subject are: A. Gemoll, _Die Scriptores
  Historiae Augustae_ (1886); H. Peter, _Die Scriptores Historiae
  Augustae_ (1892); G. Tropea, _Studi sugli Scriptores Historiae
  Augustae_ (1899-1903); J.M. Heer, _Der historische Wert der Vita
  Commodi in der Sammlung der Scriptores Historiae Augustae_ (1901); C.
  Lécrivain, _Études sur l'histoire Auguste_ (1904); E. Kornemann,
  _Kaiser Hadrian und der letzte grosse Historiker von Rom_ (1905),
  according to whom "the last great historian of Rome" is Lollius
  Urbicus; O. Schulz, _Das Kaiserhaus der Antonine und der letzte
  Historiker Roms_ (1907). On their style, see C. Paucker, _De
  Latinitate Scriptorum Historiae Augustae_ (1870); special lexicon by
  C. Lessing (1901-1906). An English translation is included in _The
  Lives of the Roman Emperors_, by John Bernard (1698). See further
  ROME: _History_ (anc. _ad fin._), section "Authorities"; M. Schanz,
  _Geschichte der römischen Litteratur_, iii. p. 69 (for Marius Maximus
  and Junius Cordus), iv. p. 47; Teuffel-Schwabe, _Hist. of Roman
  Literature_ (Eng. tr.), § 392; H. Peter, bibliography from 1893 to
  1905 in Bursian's _Jahresbericht_, cxxix. (1907).