AUGUSTINE, SAINT (d. c. 613), first archbishop of Canterbury, occupied a
position of authority in the monastery of St Andrew at Rome, when
Gregory I. summoned him to lead a mission to England in A.D. 596. The
apprehensions of Augustine's followers caused him to return to Rome, but
the pope furnished him with letters of commendation and encouraged him
to proceed. He landed in Thanet in A.D. 597, and was favourably received
by Æthelberht, king of Kent, who granted a dwelling-place for the monks
in Canterbury, and allowed them liberty to preach. Augustine first made
use of the ancient church of St Martin at Canterbury, which before his
arrival had been the oratory of the Queen Berhta and her confessor
Liudhard. Æthelberht upon his conversion employed all his influence in
support of the mission. In 601 Augustine received the pallium from
Gregory and was given authority over the Celtic churches in Britain, as
well as all future bishops consecrated in English territory, including
York. Authority over the see of York was not, however, to descend to
Augustine's successors. In 603 he consecrated Christ Church, Canterbury,
and built the monastery of SS. Peter and Paul, afterwards known as St
Augustine's. At the conference of Augustine's Oak he endeavoured in vain
to bring over the Celtic church to the observance of the Roman Easter.
He afterwards consecrated Mellitus and Justus to the sees of London and
Rochester respectively. The date of his death is not recorded by Bede,
but MS. F of the Saxon Chronicle puts it in 614, and the _Annales
Monasterienses_ in 612.

  See Bede, _Eccl. Hist._ (ed. by Plummer), i. 23-ii. 3.