AUGUSTA, a city and the county-seat of Richmond county, Georgia, U.S.A.,
at the head of steamboat navigation on the Savannah river, 132 m. N.W.
of Savannah by rail and 240 m. by river course. Pop. (1890) 33,300;
(1900) 39,441, of whom 18,487 were negroes and only 995 were
foreign-born; (1910 census) 41,040. Augusta is served by the Southern,
the Augusta Southern (controlled by the Southern), the Atlantic Coast
Line, the Charleston & Western Carolina (controlled by the Atlantic
Coast Line), the Georgia and the Central of Georgia railways, by an
electric line to Aiken, South Carolina, and by a line of steamers to
Savannah. The city extends along the river bank for a distance of more
than 3 m., and is connected by a bridge with Hamburg, and with North
Augusta, South Carolina, two residential suburbs. Augusta is well known
as a winter resort (mean winter temperature, 47° F.), and there are many
fine winter homes here of wealthy Northerners. There are good roads,
stretching from Augusta for miles in almost every direction. In North
Augusta there is a large hotel, and there is another in Summerville
(pop. in 1910, 4361), 2½ m. N.W., an attractive residential suburb and
winter resort, in which there are a country club and a large United
States arsenal, established in 1831. Broad Street is the principal
thoroughfare of Augusta, and Greene Street, with a park in the centre
and flanking rows of oaks and elms, is the finest residential street. Of
historical interest is St Paul's church (Protestant Episcopal); the
present building was erected in 1819 and is the third St Paul's church
on the same site. The first church was "built by the gentlemen of
Augusta" in 1750. In the crypt of the church General Leonidas Polk is
buried; and in the churchyard are the graves of George Steptoe
Washington, a nephew of George Washington, and of William Longstreet,
the inventor. Among the city's principal buildings are the Federal
building, the Richmond county court house, the Augusta orphan asylum,
the city hospital, the Lamar hospital for negroes, and the buildings of
Richmond Academy (incorporated in 1783), of the Academy of the Sacred
Heart (for girls), of Paine's Institute (for negroes), of Houghton
Institute, endowed in 1852 to be "free to all the children of Augusta,"
and of the medical school of the university of Georgia, founded in 1829,
and a part of the university since 1873. A granite obelisk 50 ft. high
was erected in 1861 as a memorial to the signers for Georgia of the
Declaration of Independence; beneath it are buried Lyman Hall
(1726-1790) and George Walton (1740-1804). There are two Italian marble
monuments in honour of Confederate soldiers, and monuments to the
Southern poets, Paul Hamilton Hayne and Richard Henry Wilde (1789-1847).

In commerce and manufacturing, Augusta ranks second among the cities of
Georgia. As a centre of trade for the "Cotton Belt," it has a large
wholesale and retail business; and it is an important cotton market. The
principal manufacture is cotton goods; among the other products are
lumber, flour, cotton waste, cotton-seed oil and cake, ice, silk,
boilers and engines, and general merchandise staples. Water-power for
factories is secured by a system of "water-power canals" from a large
dam across the Savannah, built in 1847 and enlarged in 1871; the
principal canal, owned by the city, is so valuable as nearly to pay the
interest on the municipal debt. In 1905 the value of the city's total
factory product was $8,829,305, of which $3,832,009, or 43.4%, was the
value of the cotton goods. The principal newspaper is the _Augusta
Chronicle_, founded in 1785.

Augusta was established in 1735-1736 by James Edward Oglethorpe, the
founder of Georgia, and was named in honour of the princess of Wales.
The Carolina colonists had a trading post in its vicinity before the
settlement by Oglethorpe. The fort, built in 1736, was first named Fort
Augusta, and in 1780, at the time of the British occupation, was
enlarged and renamed Fort Cornwallis; its site is now marked by a
Memorial Cross, erected by the Colonial Dames of Georgia in the
churchyard of St Paul's. Tobacco was the principal agricultural product
during the 18th century, and for its culture negro slaves were
introduced from Carolina, before the restrictions of the Georgia
Trustees on slavery were removed. During the colonial period several
treaties with Indians were made at Augusta; by the most important, that
of 1763, the Choctaws, Creeks, Chickasaws, Cherokees and Catawbas agreed
(in a meeting with the governors of North and South Carolina, Virginia
and Georgia) to the terms of the treaty of Paris. At the opening of the
American War of Independence, the majority of the people of Augusta were
Loyalists. The town was taken by the British under Lieut.-Col. Archibald
Campbell (1739-1791) in January 1779, but was evacuated a month later;
it was the seat of government of Georgia for almost the entire period
from the capture of Savannah in December 1778 until May 1780, and was
then abandoned by the Patriots and was occupied chiefly by Loyalists
under Lieut.-Col. Thomas Brown. In September 1780 a force of less than
500 patriots under Col. Elijah Clarke marched against the town in three
divisions, and while one division, attacking a neighbouring Indian camp,
drew off most of the garrison, the other two divisions entered the town;
but British reinforcements arrived before Brown could be dislodged from
a building in which he had taken refuge, and Clarke was forced to
withdraw. A stronger American force, under Lieut.-Col. Henry Lee,
renewed the siege in May 1781 and gained possession on the 5th of June.
From 1783 until 1795 Augusta was again the seat of the state government.
It was the meeting-place of the Land Court which confiscated the
property of the Loyalists of Georgia, and of the convention which
ratified for Georgia the Constitution of the United States. In 1798 it
was incorporated as a town, and in 1817 it was chartered as a city.
Augusta was the home of the inventor, William Longstreet (1759-1814),
who as early as 1788 received a patent from the state of Georgia for a
steamboat, but met with no practical success until 1808; as early as
1801 he had made experiments in the application of steam to cotton gins
and saw-mills at Augusta. Near Augusta, on the site now occupied by the
Eli Whitney Country Club, Eli Whitney is said to have first set up and
operated his cotton gin; he is commemorated by a mural tablet in the
court house. The establishment of a steamboat line to Savannah in 1817
aided Augusta's rapid commercial development. There was a disastrous
fire in 1829, an epidemic of yellow fever in 1839, and a flood in 1840,
but the growth of the city was not seriously checked; the cotton
receipts of 1846 were 212,019 bales, and in 1847 a cotton factory was
built. During the Civil War Augusta was the seat of extensive military
factories, the tall chimney of the Confederate powder mills still
standing as a memorial. The economic development has, since the Civil
War, been steady and continuous. An exposition was held in Augusta in
1888, and another in 1893.