AULNOY (or AUNOY), MARIE CATHERINE LE JUMEL DE BARNEVILLE DE LA MOTTE,
BARONNE D' (c. 1650-1705), French author, was born about 1650 at
Barneville near Bourg-Achard (Eure). She was the niece of Marie Bruneau
des Loges, the friend of Malherbe and of J.G. de Balzac, who was called
the "tenth Muse." She married on the 8th of March 1666 François de la
Motte, a gentleman in the service of César, duc de Vendôme, who became
Baron d'Aulnoy in 1654. With her mother, who by a second marriage had
become marquise de Gudaigne, she instigated a prosecution for high
treason against her husband. The conspiracy was exposed, and the two
women saved themselves by a hasty flight to England. Thence they went
(February 1679) to Spain, but were eventually allowed to return to
France in reward for secret services rendered to the government. Mme.
d'Aulnoy died in Paris on the 14th of January 1705. She wrote fairy
tales, _Contes nouvelles ou les Fées a la mode_ (3 vols., 1698), in the
manner of Charles Perrault. This collection (24 tales) included
_L'Oiseau bleu, Finette Cendron, La Chatte blanche_ and others. The
originals of most of her admirable tales are to be found in the
_Pentamerone_ (1637) of Giovanni Battista Basile. Other works are:
_L'Histoire d'Hippolyte, comte de Duglas_ (1690), a romance in the style
of Madame de la Fayette, though much inferior to its model; _Mémoires de
la cour d'Espagne_ (1679-1681); and a _Relation du voyage d'Espagne_
(1690 or 1691) in the form of letters, edited in 1874-1876 as _La Cour
et la ville de Madrid_ by Mme. B. Carey; _Histoire de Jean de Bourbon_
(1692); _Mémoires sur la cour de France_ (1692); _Mémoires de la cour
d'Angleterre_ (1695). Her historical writings are partly borrowed from
existing records, to which she adds much that must be regarded as
fiction, and some vivid descriptions of contemporary manners.

  The _Diverting Works of the Countess d'Anois_, including some
  extremely untrustworthy "Memoirs of her own life," were printed in
  London in 1707. _The Fairy Tales of Madame d'Aulnoy_, with an
  introduction by Lady Thackeray Ritchie, appeared in 1892. For
  biographical particulars see M. de Lescure's introduction to the
  _Contes des Fées_ (1881).