AUMONT, the name of a family which played an important part in French
history. The origin of the name is uncertain, but it has usually been
derived from Aumont, now a small commune in the department of the Somme.
The family was of great antiquity, a Jean, sire d'Aumont, having
accompanied Louis IX. on crusade. It was already powerful in the 14th
century, and during the English wars of that period its members fought
in the armies of the kings of France. Towards the end of the century,
the family took the part of the dukes of Burgundy, but returned to the
side of France on the death of Charles the Bold. Jean d'Aumont,
lieutenant-general to the king of France in the government of Burgundy,
rendered important services to Louis XII. and Francis I. Another Jean
d'Aumont (d. 1595), a marshal of France and knight of the order of the
Holy Ghost since its institution in 1578, fought against the Huguenots
under the last of the Valois kings; but he was among the first to
recognize Henry IV., and was appointed governor of Champagne and of
Brittany, where he had to fight against the League. His grandson Antoine
(1601-1669) was also a marshal of France (1651), governor of Paris
(1662), duke and peer (1665). Louis Marie Augustin, duc d'Aumont
(1709-1782), was a celebrated collector of works of art. Louis Marie
Celeste d'Aumont, due de Piennes, afterwards duc d'Aumont (1762-1831),
emigrated during the Revolution and served in the army of the royalists,
as also in the Swedish army. During the Hundred Days he effected a
descent upon Normandy in the Bourbon interest, and succeeded in
capturing Bayeux and Caen.