AURANGABAD, or AURUNGABAD, a city of India, in the dominions of the
nizam of Hyderabad, north-west division, situated 138 m. from Poona, 207
from Bombay via Poona, and 270 from Hyderabad on the river Kaum. It
gives its name to a district. It was founded in 1610, under the name of
Fatchnagar, by Malik Ambar, an Abyssinian, who had risen from the
condition of a slave to great influence. Subsequently it became the
capital of the Mogul conquests in the south of India. Aurangzeb, who
erected here a mausoleum to his wife which has been compared to the Taj
at Agra, made the city the seat of his government during his viceroyalty
of the Deccan, and gave it the name of Aurangabad. It thus grew into the
principal city of an extensive province of the same name, stretching
westward to the sea, and comprehending nearly the whole of the territory
now comprised within the northern division of the presidency of Bombay.
Aurangabad long continued to be the capital of the succession of
potentates bearing the modern title of nizam, after those chiefs became
independent of Delhi. They abandoned it subsequently, and transferred
their capital to Hyderabad, when the town at once began to decline.
Aurangabad is a railway station on the Hyderabad-Godavari line, 435 m.
from Bombay. In 1901 the population, with military cantonments, was
36,837, showing an increase of 8% in the decade. It has a cotton mill.

The district of Aurangabad has an area of 6172 sq. m. The population in
1901 was 721,407. It contains the famous caves of Ajanta, and also the
battlefield of Assaye.