AURELLE DE PALADINES, LOUIS JEAN BAPTISTE D' (1804-1877), French
general, was born at Malzieu, Lozère, on the 9th of January 1804. He was
educated at St Cyr, and entered the army as sub-lieutenant of foot in
1824. He served with distinction in Algeria between 1841 and 1848,
becoming lieut.-colonel and an officer of the Legion of Honour; took
part in the Roman campaigns of 1848 and 1849, and was made colonel. He
served as general of brigade throughout the Crimean War of 1854-56,
being promoted general of division and commander of the Legion of
Honour. During the campaign in Lombardy in 1859 he commanded at
Marseilles, and superintended the despatch of men and stores to the seat
of war, and for his services he was made a grand officer of the Legion
of Honour. Placed on the reserve list in 1869, he was recalled to the
Marseilles command on the outbreak of the Franco-German War of 1870-71.
After the first capture of Orleans by the Germans, he was appointed by
the Government of National Defence, in November 1870, to the command of
the Army of the Loire. He was at first very successful against von der
Tann-Rathsamhausen, winning the battle of Coulmiers and compelling the
Germans to evacuate Orleans, but the capitulation of Metz had set free
additional German troops to oppose him, and, after his defeat at Beaune
la Rolande and subsequent unsuccessful fighting near Orleans, resulting
in its recapture by the Germans in December, Aurelle retreated into the
Sologne and was superseded. After the armistice he was elected to the
National Assembly by the departments both of Allier and Gironde. He sat
for Allier and was one of the fifteen officers chosen to assist in the
peace negotiations. He was decorated with the grand cross of the Legion
of Honour, and was given the command at Bordeaux, but retired in 1872.
Elected a life senator in 1875, he supported the monarchical majority of
1876. He died at Versailles on the 17th of December 1877. He was the
author of _La Première Armée de la Loire_, published in 1872.