AURELIANUS, CAELIUS, a physician of Sicca in Numidia, who probably
flourished in the 5th century A.D., although some place him two or even
three centuries earlier. In favour of the later date is the nature of
his Latin, which shows a strong tendency to the Romance, and the
similarity of his language to that of Cassius Felix, also an African
medical writer, who about 450 wrote a short treatise, chiefly based on
Galen. We possess a translation by Aurelianus of two works of Soranus of
Ephesus (2nd century), the chief of the "methodist" school of medicine,
on chronic and acute maladies--_Tardae_ or _Chronicae Passiones_, in
five, and _Celeres_ or _Acutae Passiones_ in three books. The
translation, which is especially valuable since the original has been
lost, shows that Soranus possessed considerable practical skill in the
diagnosis of ordinary and even of exceptional diseases. It is also
important as containing numerous references to the methods of earlier
medical authorities. We also possess considerable fragments of his
_Medicinales Responsiones_, also adapted from Soranus, a general
treatise on medicine in the form of question and answer; it deals with
rules of health (_salutaria praecepta_) and the pathology of internal
diseases (ed. Rose, _Anecdota Graeca et Latina_, ii., 1870). Where it is
possible to compare Aurelianus's translation with the original--as in a
fragment of his Gynaecia with Soranus's [Greek: Peri gynaikeion
Pathon]--it is found that it is literal, but abridged. There is
apparently no MS. of the treatises in existence. (Editions: Amman, 1709;
Haller, 1774.)