AURIGA (the "charioteer" or "waggoner"), in astronomy, a constellation
of the northern hemisphere, found in the catalogues of Eudoxus (4th
century B.C.) and Aratus (3rd century B.C.). It was symbolized by the
Greeks as an old man in a more or less sitting posture, with a goat and
her kids in his left hand, and a bridle in his right. The ancient Greeks
associated this constellation with many myths. Some assume it to be
Erichthonius, son of Athena and Hephaestus, who was translated to the
skies by Zeus on account of his invention of chariots or coaches. Others
assume it to be Myrtilus, a son of Hermes and Clytic, and charioteer to
Oenomaus, who was placed in the heavens by Hermes. Another myth has it
to be Olenus, a son of Hephaestus, and father of Aega and Helice, two
nymphs who nursed Zeus. Ptolemy catalogued fourteen stars, Tycho Brahe
twenty-seven, and Hevelius forty in this constellation. Interesting
stars are: [alpha] _Aurigae_ or _Capella_ (the goat), one of the
brightest stars in the heavens, determined by Newall and Campbell to be
a spectroscopic binary; [beta] _Aurigae_, a star of the second magnitude
also a spectroscopic binary; [epsilon] _Aurigae_, an irregularly
variable star; and _Nova Aurigae_, a "new" star discovered by Anderson
in 1892, and afterwards found on a photographic plate exposed at Harvard
in December 1891. Several fine star clusters also appear in this
constellation.