AURIFABER (the latinized form of Goldschmidt), a surname borne by three
prominent men of the Reformation period in Germany.

1. ANDREAS (1514-1559) was a physician of some repute, but through his
influence with Albert of Brandenburg, last grand-master of the Teutonic
order, and first Protestant duke of Prussia, became an outstanding
figure in the controversy associated with Andreas Osiander (q.v.) whose
daughter he had married.

2. JOANNES (Vratislaviensis; 1517-1568), the younger brother of Andreas,
was born at Breslau on the 30th of January 1517, and educated at
Wittenberg, where he formed a close and lasting friendship with
Melanchthon. After graduating in 1538 he spent twelve years as _docent_
at the university, and having then received his doctorate of divinity,
was appointed professor of divinity and pastor of the church of St
Nicholas at Rostock. He distinguished himself by his conciliatory
disposition, earned the special confidence of Duke John Albert of
Mecklenburg, and took a leading part in 1552 in drawing up the
constitution of the Mecklenburg church. He also settled some religious
disputes in the town of Lübeck. In 1553 Duke Albert of Prussia, anxious
to heal the differences in the Prussian church caused by the discussion
of Osiander's doctrines, invited him to Königsberg, and in the following
year appointed him professor of divinity and president of the Samland
diocese. Joannes, however, found it impossible to conciliate all
parties, and in 1565 returned to Breslau, where, in 1567, he became
pastor in the church of St Elizabeth and inspector of the Lutheran
churches and schools. He died on the 19th of October 1568.

3. JOANNES (Vinariensis; 1519-1575), was born in the county of Mansfeldt
in 1519. He studied at Wittenberg where he heard the lectures of Luther,
and afterwards became tutor to Count Mansfeldt. In the war of 1544-45 he
accompanied the army as field-preacher, and then lived with Luther as
his _famulus_ or private secretary, being present at his death in 1546.
In the following year he spent six months in prison with John Frederick,
elector of Saxony, who had been captured by the emperor, Charles V. He
held for some years the office of court-preacher at Weimar, but owing to
theological disputes was compelled to resign this office in 1561. In
1566 he was appointed to the Lutheran church at Erfurt, and there
remained till his death in November 1575. Besides taking a share in the
first collected or Jena edition of Luther's works (1556), Aurifaber
sought out and published at Eisleben in 1564-1565 several writings not
included in that edition. He also published Luther's _Letters_ (1556,
1565), and _Table Talk_ (1566). This popular work, which has given him
most of his fame, is unfortunately but a second or third hand
compilation.

  See G. Kawerau's art. in Herzog-Hauck's _Realencyk. für prot.
  Theologie_, and the literature there cited.