AURORA POLARIS (_Aurora Borealis_ and _Australis_, Polar Light, Northern
Lights), a natural phenomenon which occurs in many forms, some of great
beauty.

1. _Forms._--Various schemes of classification have been proposed, but
none has met with universal acceptance; the following are at least the
principal types. (1) _Arcs._ These most commonly resemble segments of
circles, but are not infrequently elliptical or irregular in outline.
The ends of arcs frequently extend to the horizon, but often one or both
ends stop short of this. Several arcs may be visible at the same time.
Usually the under or concave edge of the arc is the more clearly
defined, and adjacent to it the sky often seems darker than elsewhere.
It is rather a disputed point whether this dark segment--through which
starlight has been seen to pass--represents a real atmospheric condition
or is merely a contrast effect. (2) _Bands._ These may be nearly
straight and regular in outline, as if broken portions of arcs;
frequently they are ribbon-like serpentine forms showing numerous
sinuosities. (3) _Rays._ Frequently an arc or band is visibly composed
of innumerable short rays separated by distinctly less luminous
intervals. These rays are more or less perpendicular to the arc or band;
sometimes they are very approximately parallel to one another, on other
occasions they converge towards a point. Longer rays often show an
independent existence. Not infrequently rays extend from the upper edge
of an arc towards the zenith. Combinations of rays sometimes resemble a
luminous fan, or a series of fans, or part of a hollow luminous
cylinder. Rays often alter suddenly in length, seeming to stretch down
towards the horizon or mount towards the zenith. This accounts for the
description of aurora as "Merry Dancers." (4) _Curtains or Draperies._
This form is rare except in Arctic regions, where it is sometimes fairly
frequent. It is one of the most imposing forms. As a rule the higher
portion is visibly made up of rays, the light tending to become more
continuous towards the lower edge; the combination suggests a connected
whole, like a curtain whose alternate portions are in light and shade.
The curtain often shows several conspicuous folds, and the lower edge
often resembles frilled drapery. At several stations in Greenland
auroral curtains have been observed when passing right overhead to
narrow to a thin luminous streak, exactly as a vertical sheet of light
would seem to do to one passing underneath it. (5) _Corona_. A fully
developed corona is perhaps the finest form of aurora. As the name
implies, there is a sort of crown of light surrounding a comparatively
or wholly dark centre. Farther from the centre the ray structure is
usually prominent. The rays may lie very close together, or may be
widely separated from one another. (6) _Patches_. During some displays,
auroral light appears in irregular areas or patches, which sometimes
bear a very close resemblance to illuminated detached clouds. (7)
_Diffused Aurora_. Sometimes a large part of the sky shows a diffuse
illumination, which, though brighter in some parts than others,
possesses no definite outlines. How far the different forms indicate
real difference in the nature of the phenomenon, and how far they are
determined by the position of the observer, it is difficult to say. Not
infrequently several different forms are visible at the same time.

[Illustration]

2. _Isochasms._--Aurora is seldom observed in low latitudes. In the
southern hemisphere there is comparatively little inhabited land in high
latitudes and observational data are few; thus little is known as to how
the frequency varies with latitude and longitude. Even in the northern
hemisphere there are large areas in the Arctic about which little is
known. H. Fritz (2) has, however, drawn a series of curves which are
believed to give a good general idea of the relative frequency of aurora
throughout the northern hemisphere. Fritz' curves, shown in the
illustration, are termed isochasms, from the Greek word employed by
Aristotle to denote aurora. Points on the same curve are supposed to
have the same average number of auroras in the year, and this average
number is shown adjacent to the curve. Starting from the equator and
travelling northwards we find in the extreme south of Spain an average
of only one aurora in ten years. In the north of France the average
rises to five a year; in the north of Ireland to thirty a year; a little
to the north of the Shetlands to one hundred a year. Between the
Shetlands and Iceland we cross the curve of maximum frequency, and
farther north the frequency diminishes. The curve of maximum frequency
forms a slightly irregular oval, whose centre, the auroral pole, is
according to Fritz at about 81° N. lat., 70° W. long. Isochasms reach a
good deal farther south in America than in Europe. In other words,
auroras are much more numerous in the southern parts of Canada and in
the United States than in the same latitudes of Europe.

3. _Annual Variation._--Table I. shows the annual variation observed in
the frequency of aurora. It has been compiled from several authorities,
especially Joseph Lovering (4) and Sophus Tromholt (5). The monthly
figures denote the percentages of the total number seen in the year. The
stations are arranged in order of latitude. Individual places are first
considered, then a few large areas.

The Godthaab data in Table I. are essentially those given by Prof. A.
Paulsen (6) as observed by Kleinschmidt in the winters of 1865 to 1882,
supplemented by Lovering's data for summer. Starting at the extreme
north, we have a simple period with a well-marked maximum at midwinter,
and no auroras during several months at midsummer. This applies to
Hammerfest, Jakobshavn, Godthaab and the most northern division of
Scandinavia. The next division of Scandinavia shows a transition stage.
To the south of this in Europe the single maximum at mid-winter is
replaced by two maxima, somewhere about the equinoxes.

  4. In considering what is the real significance of the great
  difference apparent in Table I. between higher and middle latitudes, a
  primary consideration is that aurora is seldom seen until the sun is
  some degrees below the horizon. There is no reason to suppose that the
  physical causes whose effects we see as aurora are in existence only
  when aurora is visible. Until means are devised for detecting aurora
  during bright sunshine, our knowledge as to the hour at which these
  causes are most frequently or most powerfully in operation must remain
  incomplete. But it can hardly be doubted that the differences apparent
  in Table I. are largely due to the influence of sunlight. In high
  latitudes for several months in summer it is never dark, and
  consequently a total absence of visible aurora is practically
  inevitable. Some idea of this influence can be derived from figures
  obtained by the Swedish International Expedition of 1882-1883 at Cape
  Thorsden, Spitsbergen, lat. 78° 28' N. (7). The original gives the
  relative frequency of aurora for each degree of depression of the sun
  below the horizon, assuming the effect of twilight to be nil (i.e. the
  relative frequency to be 100) when the depression is 18.5° or more.
  The following are a selection of the figures:--

    Angle of depression  4.5°  7.5°  10.5°  12.5°  15.5°.
    Relative frequency   0.3   9.3   44.9   74.5   95.9.

  These figures are not wholly free from uncertainties, arising from
  true diurnal and annual variations in the frequency, but they give a
  good general idea of the influence of twilight.

  If sunlight and twilight were the sole cause of the apparent annual
  variation, the frequency would have a simple period, with a maximum at
  midwinter and a minimum at midsummer. This is what is actually shown
  by the most northern stations and districts in Table I. When we come,
  however, below 65° lat. in Europe the frequency near the equinoxes
  rises above that at midwinter, and we have a distinct double period,
  with a principal minimum at midsummer and a secondary minimum at
  midwinter. In southern Europe--where, however, auroras are too few to
  give smooth results in a limited number of years--in southern Canada,
  and in the United States, the difference between the winter and summer
  months is much reduced. Whether there is any real difference between
  high and mean latitudes in the annual frequency of the causes rendered
  visible by aurora, it is difficult to say. The Scandinavian data, from
  the wealth of observations, are probably the most representative, and
  even in the most northern district of Scandinavia the smallness of the
  excess of the frequencies in December and January over those in March
  and October suggests that some influence tending to create maxima at
  the equinoxes has largely counterbalanced the influence of sunlight
  and twilight in reducing the frequency at these seasons.

  5. _Fourier Analysis._--With a view to more minute examination, the
  annual frequency can be expressed in Fourier series, whose terms
  represent waves, whose periods are 12, 6, 4, 3, &c. months. This has
  been done by Lovering (4) for thirty-five stations. The nature of the
  results will best be explained by reference to the formula given by
  Lovering as a mean from all the stations considered, viz.:--

    8.33 + 3.03 sin(30t + 100°52') + 2.53 sin(60t + 309° 5')
         + 0.16 sin(90t + 213°31') + 0.56 sin(120t + 162°45')
         + 0.27 sin(150t + 32°38').

  [Illustration: PLATE I.

    FIG. 1--TWO TYPES OF AURORAL ARCS.

    FIG. 2--TWO TYPES OF AURORAL RAYS.

    (From the _Internationale Polarforschung_, 1882-1883, by permission
    of the _Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften_, Vienna.)]

  [Illustration: PLATE II.

    FIG. 3--AURORAL BANDS.

    FIG. 4--AURORAL CURTAIN BELOW AN ARC.

    FIG. 5.--AURORAL CORONA.]

    TABLE I.--_Annual Frequency (Relative)._

    +-----------------+-----------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
    |      Place.     | Latitude. | Jan. | Feb. | Mar. | Apr. | May  | June | July | Aug. | Sep. | Oct. | Nov. | Dec. |
    +-----------------+-----------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
    |                 |     °     |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    | Hammerfest      |    70½    | 20.9 | 17.6 |  8.8 |  0   |  0   |  0   |  0   |  0   |  4.4 |  9.9 | 17.6 | 20.9 |
    | Jakobshavn      |    69     | 14.6 | 13.0 |  9.2 |  .5  |  0   |  0   |  0   |  0   |  9.2 | 15.1 | 18.4 | 20.0 |
    | Godthaab        |    64     | 15.5 | 12.4 |  9.7 |  4.9 |  0   |  0   |  0   |  1.2 |  8.7 | 13.3 | 17.0 | 17.4 |
    | St Petersburg   |    60     |  6.5 |  9.1 | 16.8 | 13.8 |  3.5 |  1.2 |  1.4 |  5.9 | 13.8 | 13.1 |  7.6 |  7.3 |
    | Christiania     |    60     |  8.6 | 11.4 | 14.0 | 11.2 |  0.6 |  0   |  0.2 |  6.5 | 14.6 | 12.2 | 10.3 | 10.3 |
    | Upsala          |    60     |  8.4 | 12.9 | 14.9 |  7.4 |  0.7 |  0.2 |  0.4 |  7.1 | 12.4 | 14.3 | 10.7 | 10.7 |
    | Stockholm       |    59     |  7.6 | 10.0 | 14.7 | 16.4    3.8 |  0.0 |  0.0 |  5.6 | 12.9 | 11.4 | 10.0 |  7.3 |
    | Edinburgh       |    56     |  9.6 | 12.6 | 14.0 |  9.5 |  3.4 |  0.0 |  1.7 |  6.0 | 12.6 | 13.5 | 11.8 |  5.2 |
    | Berlin          |    52½    |  7.6 | 10.8 | 16.4 | 15.5 | 11.4 |  0.6 |  2.9 |  2.9 |  6.5 | 13.2 |  8.5 |  4.1 |
    | London          |    51½    |  8.6 | 10.5 | 10.2 | 10.7 |  4.0 |  1.1 |  1.9 |  5.6 | 14.5 | 16.9 |  9.6 |  6.4 |
    | Quebec          |    47     |  3.6 | 14.8 |  8.3 | 14.2 |  4.1 |  5.9 |  7.7 |  5.9 | 11.2 | 12.4 |  7.7 |  4.1 |
    | Toronto         |    43½    |  5.4 |  9.5 |  8.7 | 11.8 |  9.0 |  6.2 |  8.0 |  6.4 |  8.5 | 11.1 |  8.7 |  6.7 |
    | Cambridge, Mass.|    42½    |  5.1 |  8.2 | 11.8 | 10.2 |  6.4 |  5.1 | 10.3 |  8.5 | 13.3 |  9.2 |  6.8 |  5.1 |
    | New Haven, Conn.|    41½    |  7.7 |  7.3 |  8.9 |  8.2 |  7.6 |  5.7 |  8.9 |  8.1 | 11.9 |  7.6 | 10.6 |  7.5 |
    | Scandinavia     | N. of 68½ | 16.4 | 13.8 | 14.8 |  1.6 |  0.0 |  0.0 |  0.0 |  0.4 |  7.8 | 15.1 | 14.4 | 15.7 |
    |      "          | 68½  to 65| 15.3 | 14.6 | 13.7 |  2.9 |  0.0 |  0.0 |  0.0 |  1.1 |  9.7 | 14.6 | 14.0 | 14.1 |
    |      "          | 65 to 61½ | 13.2 | 12.3 | 14.5 |  5.4 |  0.2 |  0.0 |  0.0 |  2.8 | 13.1 | 14.2 | 12.8 | 11.5 |
    |      "          | 61½  to 58|  9.5 | 11.2 | 13.5 | 10.9 |  1.3 |  0.1 |  0.4 |  5.7 | 13.6 | 13.8 | 10.4 |  9.6 |
    |      "          | S. of 58  |  8.2 | 11.9 | 12.6 | 13.3 |  1.5 |  0.1 |  0.6 |  4.9 | 14.9 | 13.5 | 10.3 |  8.2 |
    | New York State  | 45 to 40½ |  6.3 |  7.4 |  9.1 | 11.0 |  7.4 |  6.6 |  8.8 | 10.4 | 11.7 |  9.7 |  6.2 |  5.4 |
    +-----------------+-----------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+

  The total number of auroras in the year is taken as 100, and t denotes
  the time, in months, that has elapsed since the middle of January.
  Putting t=0, 1, &c., in succession, we get the percentages of the
  total number of auroras which occur in January, February, and so on.
  The first periodic term has a period of twelve, the second of six
  months, and similarly for the others. The first periodic term is
  largest when t × 30° + 100° 52' = 450°. This makes t = 11.6 months
  after the middle of January, otherwise the 3rd of January,
  approximately. The 6-month term has the earliest of its two equal
  maxima about the 26th of March. These two are much the most important
  of the periodic terms. The angles 100° 52', 309° 5', &c., are known as
  the phase angles of the respective periodic terms, while 3.03, 2.53,
  &c., are the corresponding amplitudes. Table II. gives a selection of
  Lovering's results. The stations are arranged according to latitude.

    TABLE II.

    +----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
    |                      | Annual Term. | 6-Month Term.| 4-Month Term.|
    |       Station.       +-------+------+-------+------+-------+------+
    |                      |  Amp. |Phase.|  Amp. |Phase.|  Amp. |Phase.|
    +----------------------+-------+------+-------+------+-------+------+
    |                      |       |   °  |       |   °  |       |   °  |
    | Jakobshavn           | 10.40 |  123 |  1.13 |  206 |  1.41 |  333 |
    | Godthaab             |  8.21 |  111 |  1.54 |  316 |  0.64 |  335 |
    | St Petersburg        |  2.81 |   96 |  5.99 |  309 |  0.57 |  208 |
    | Christiania          |  4.83 |  116 |  4.99 |  317 |  0.76 |  189 |
    | Upsala               |  5.41 |  119 |  4.57 |  322 |  0.86 |  296 |
    | Stockholm            |  3.68 |   91 |  5.80 |  303 |  1.31 |  180 |
    | Makerstown (Scotland)|  5.79 |  102 |  4.47 |  310 |  2.00 |  342 |
    | Great Britain        |  3.87 |  126 |  4.24 |  287 |  0.40 |   73 |
    | Toronto              |  0.18 |   12 |  2.13 |  260 |  0.52 |  305 |
    | Cambridge, Mass.     |  1.02 |  262 |  2.84 |  339 |  1.28 |  253 |
    | New Haven, Conn.     |  0.99 |  183 |  1.02 |  313 |  0.57 |  197 |
    | New York State       |  1.34 |  264 |  2.29 |  325 |  0.54 |  157 |
    +----------------------+-------+------+-------+------+-------+------+

  Speaking generally, the annual term diminishes in importance as we
  travel south. North of 55° in Europe its phase angle seems fairly
  constant, not differing very much from the value 110° in Lovering's
  general formula. The 6-month term is small, in the two most northern
  stations, but south of 60° N. lat. it is on the whole the most
  important term. Excluding Jakobshavn, the phase angles in the 6-month
  term vary wonderfully little, and approach the value 309° in
  Lovering's general formula. North of lat. 50° the 4-month term is, as
  a rule, comparatively unimportant, but in the American stations its
  relative importance is increased. The phase angle, however, varies so
  much as to suggest that the term mainly represents local causes or
  observational uncertainties. Lovering's general formula suggests that
  the 4-month term is really less important than the 3-month term, but
  he gives no data for the latter at individual stations.

  6. Sunlight is not the only disturbing cause in estimates of auroral
  frequency. An idea of the disturbing influence of cloud may be derived
  from some interesting results from the Cape Thorsden (7) observations.
  These show how the frequency of visible auroras diminished as cloud
  increased from 0 (sky quite clear) to 10 (sky wholly overcast).

  Grouping the results, we have:

    Amount of cloud        0    1 to 3    4 to 6    7 to 9    10
    Relative frequency   100      82        57        46       8

  Out of a total of 1714 hours during which the sky was wholly overcast
  the Swedish expedition saw auroras on 17, occurring on 14 separate
  days, whereas 226 hours of aurora would have occurred out of an equal
  number of hours with the sky quite clear. The figures being based on
  only one season's observations are somewhat irregular. Smoothing them,
  Carlheim-Gyllensköld gives f = 100' - 7.3c as the most probable linear
  relation between c, the amount of cloud, and f, the frequency,
  assuming the latter to be 100 when there is no cloud.

7. _Diurnal Variation._--The apparent daily period at most stations is
largely determined by the influence of daylight on the visibility. It is
only during winter and in high latitudes that we can hope to ascertain
anything directly as to the real diurnal variation of the causes whose
influence is visible at night as aurora. Table III. gives particulars of
the number of occasions when aurora was seen at each hour of the
twenty-four during three expeditions in high latitudes when a special
outlook was kept.

The data under A refer to Cape Thorsden (78° 28' N. lat., 15° 42' E.
long.), those under B to Jan Mayen (8) (71° 0' N. lat., 8° 28' W.
long.), both for the winter of 1882-1883. The data under C are given by
H. Arctowski (9) for the "Belgica" Expedition in 1898. They may be
regarded as applying approximately to the mean position of the
"Belgica," or 70½° S. lat., 86½° W. long. The method of counting
frequencies was fairly alike, at least in the case of A and B, but in
comparing the different stations the data should be regarded as relative
rather than absolute. The Jan Mayen data refer really to Göttingen mean
time, but this was only twenty-three minutes late on local time. In
calculating the percentages of forenoon and afternoon occurrences half
the entries under noon and midnight were assigned to each half of the
day. Even at Cape Thorsden, the sun at midwinter is only 11° below the
horizon at noon, and its effect on the visibility is thus not wholly
negligible. The influence of daylight is presumably the principal cause
of the difference between the phenomena during November, December and
January at Cape Thorsden and Jan Mayen, for in the equinoctial months
the results from these two stations are closely similar. Whilst daylight
is the principal cause of the diurnal inequality, it is not the only
cause, otherwise there would be as many auroras in the morning
(forenoon) as in the evening (afternoon). The number seen in the evening
is, however, according to Table III., considerably in excess at all
seasons. Taking the whole winter, the percentage seen in the evening was
the same for the "Belgica" as for Jan Mayen, i.e. for practically the
same latitudes South and North. At Cape Thorsden from November to
January there seems a distinct double period, with minima near noon and
midnight. The other months at Cape Thorsden show a single maximum and
minimum, the former before midnight. The same phenomenon appears at Jan
Mayen especially in November, December and January, and it is the normal
state of matters in temperate latitudes, where the frequency is usually
greatest between 8 and 10 P.M. An excess of evening over morning
occurrences is also the rule, and it is not infrequently more pronounced
than in Table III. Thus at Tasiusak (65° 37' N. lat., 37° 33' W. long.)
the Danish Arctic Expedition (10) of 1904 found seventy-five out of
every hundred occurrences to take place before midnight.

  TABLE III.--_Diurnal Variation._

  +-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------------------+
  |             |           |           |Feb., Mar.,|Sep. to Mar. (N. Lat.).|
  |    Hour.    |    Dec.   |Nov. & Jan.|Sep. & Oct.|Mar. to Sep. (S. Lat.).|
  |             +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+
  |             |  A  |  B  |  A  |  B  |  A  |  B  |   A   |   B   |   C   |
  +-------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+
  |       1     |  14 |   7 |  14 |   8 |  27 |  23 |   55  |   38  |   24  |
  |       2     |  10 |   6 |  15 |   6 |  20 |  25 |   45  |   37  |   23  |
  |       3     |   9 |   4 |  15 |   5 |  15 |  21 |   39  |   30  |   10  |
  |       4     |  10 |   5 |  21 |   7 |  14 |  18 |   45  |   30  |    4  |
  |       5     |  13 |   5 |  20 |   3 |  10 |  10 |   43  |   18  |    2  |
  |       6     |  11 |   3 |  15 |   4 |   2 |   3 |   28  |   10  |    1  |
  |       7     |   9 |   2 |  13 |   3 |   1 |   2 |   23  |    7  |    0  |
  |       8     |   5 |   1 |   6 |   1 |   0 |   0 |   11  |    2  |    0  |
  |       9     |   7 |   2 |   9 |   0 |   0 |   0 |   16  |    2  |    0  |
  |      10     |  10 |   0 |   5 |   0 |   0 |   0 |   15  |    0  |    0  |
  |      11     |   9 |   0 |   6 |   0 |   0 |   0 |   15  |    0  |    0  |
  |     Noon    |  10 |   0 |   4 |   0 |   0 |   0 |   14  |    0  |    0  |
  |       1     |  10 |   0 |   6 |   0 |   0 |   0 |   16  |    0  |    0  |
  |       2     |  14 |   0 |  10 |   0 |   0 |   0 |   24  |    0  |    0  |
  |       3     |  18 |   1 |  20 |   3 |   0 |   0 |   38  |    4  |    0  |
  |       4     |  16 |   7 |  19 |   7 |   1 |   1 |   36  |   15  |    0  |
  |       5     |  12 |  11 |  22 |  10 |   5 |   2 |   39  |   23  |    3  |
  |       6     |  14 |  10 |  21 |  16 |   8 |   5 |   43  |   31  |    3  |
  |       7     |  16 |  13 |  23 |  16 |  20 |   9 |   59  |   38  |   14  |
  |       8     |  15 |  12 |  22 |  18 |  24 |  24 |   61  |   54  |   25  |
  |       9     |  14 |  15 |  18 |  17 |  27 |  28 |   59  |   60  |   31  |
  |      10     |  12 |  15 |  19 |  15 |  31 |  25 |   62  |   55  |   29  |
  |      11     |  10 |  12 |  18 |  17 |  33 |  26 |   61  |   55  |   26  |
  |   Midnight  |   9 |   9 |  13 |  11 |  28 |  22 |   50  |   42  |   26  |
  +-------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+
  | Totals      | 277 | 140 | 354 | 167 | 266 | 244 |  897  |  551  |  221  |
  +-------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+
  |Percentages--|     |     |     |     |     |     |       |       |       |
  | Forenoon    |  42 |  28 |  42 |  25 |  39 |  46 |   41  |   35  |   35  |
  | Afternoon   |  58 |  72 |  58 |  75 |  61 |  54 |   59  |   65  |   65  |
  +-------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+

  8. The preceding remarks relate to auroras as a whole; the different
  forms differ considerably in their diurnal variation. Arcs, bands and,
  generally speaking, the more regular and persistent forms, show their
  greatest frequencies earlier in the night than rays or patches. Table
  IV. shows the percentages of e. (evening) and m. (morning) occurrences
  of the principal forms as recorded by the Arctic observers at Cape
  Thorsden, Jan Mayen and Tasiusak.

    TABLE IV.

    +----------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
    |                |   Arcs.   |  Bands.   |   Rays.   |  Patches. |
    +----------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    |                |  e. |  m. |  e. |  m. |  e. |  m. |  e. |  m. |
    |                +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
    | Cape Thorsden. |  76 |  24 |  66 |  34 |  52 |  48 |  51 |  49 |
    | Jan Mayen.     |  78 |  22 |  68 |  32 |  60 |  40 |  60 |  40 |
    | Tasiusak       |  85 |  15 |  85 |  15 |  65 |  35 |  62 |  38 |
    +----------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+

  At Cape Thorsden diffused auroral light had percentages e. 65, m. 35,
  practically identical with those for bands. At Tasiusak, 8 P.M. was
  the hour of most frequent occurrence for arcs and bands, whereas
  patches had their maximum frequency at 11 P.M. and rays at midnight.

9. _Lunar and other Periods._--The action of moonlight necessarily gives
rise to a true lunar period in the visibility of aurora. The extent to
which it renders aurora invisible depends, however, so much on the
natural brightness of the aurora--which depends on the time and the
place--and on the sharpness of the outlook kept, that it is difficult to
gauge it. Ekholm and Arrhenius (11) claim to have established the
existence of a true tropical lunar period of 27-32 days, and also of a
26-day period, or, as they make it, a 25.929-day period. A 26-day period
has also been derived by J. Liznar (12), after an elaborate allowance
for the disturbing effects of moonlight from the observations in
1882-1883 at Bossekop, Fort Rae and Jan Mayen. Neither of these periods
is universally conceded. The connexion between aurora and earth magnetic
disturbances renders it practically certain that if a 26-day or similar
period exists in the one phenomenon it exists also in the other, and of
the two terrestrial magnetism (q.v.) is probably the element least
affected by external complications, such as the action of moonlight.

10. _Sun-spot Connexion._--The frequency of auroral displays is much
greater in some years than others. At most places the variation in the
frequency has shown a general similarity to that of sun-spots. Table V.
gives contemporaneous data for the frequency of sun-spots and of auroras
seen in Scandinavia. The sun-spot data prior to 1902 are from A.
Wolfer's table in the _Met. Zeitschrift_ for 1902, p. 195; the more
recent data are from his quarterly lists. All are observed frequencies,
derived after Wolf's method; maxima and minima are in heavy type.

The auroral data are from Table E of Tromholt's catalogue (5), with
certain modifications. In Tromholt's yearly data the year commences with
July. This being inconvenient for comparison with sun-spots, use was
made of his monthly values to obtain corresponding data for years
commencing with January. The Tromholt-Schroeter data for Scandinavia as
a whole commenced with 1761; the figures for earlier years were obtained
by multiplying the data for Sweden by 1.356, the factor being derived by
comparing the figures for Sweden alone and for the whole of Scandinavia
from July 1761 to June 1783.

In a general way Table V. warrants the conclusion that years of many
sun-spots are years of many auroras, and years of few sun-spots years of
few auroras; but it does not disclose any very definite relationship
between the two frequencies. The maxima and minima in the two phenomena
in a good many cases are not found in the same years. On the other hand,
there is absolute coincidence in a number of cases, some of them very
striking, as for instance the remarkably low minima of 1810 and 1823.

  11. During the period 1764 to 1872 there have been ten years of
  maximum, and ten of minimum, in sun-spot frequency. Taking the three
  years of greatest frequency at each maximum, and the three years of
  least frequency at each minimum, we get thirty years of many and
  thirty of few sun-spots. Also we can split the period into an earlier
  half, 1764 to 1817, and a later half, 1818 to 1872, containing
  respectively the earlier five and the later five of the above groups
  of sun-spot maximum and minimum years. The annual means derived from
  the whole group, and the two sub-groups, of years of many and few
  sun-spots are as follows:--

    +-----------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    |                 |     1764-1872.   |    1764-1817.    |    1818-1872.    |
    |    Years of     +--------+---------+--------+---------+--------+---------+
    |                 | Spots. | Auroras.| Spots. | Auroras.| Spots. | Auroras.|
    +-----------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+--------+---------+
    | Many sun-spots. |  93.4  |   99.9  |  86.7  |   70.7  | 100.1  |  129.1  |
    | Few     "       |  13.4  |   61.5  |  13.6  |   51.6  |  13.1  |   71.3  |
    +-----------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+--------+---------+

  In each case the excess of auroras in the group of years of many
  sun-spots is decided, but the results from the two sub-periods do not
  harmonize closely. The mean sun-spot frequency for the group of years
  of few sun-spots is almost exactly the same for the two sub-periods,
  but the auroral frequency for the later group is nearly 40% in excess
  of that for the earlier, and even exceeds the auroral frequency in
  the years of many sun-spots in the earlier sub-period. This
  inconsistency, though startling at first sight, is probably more
  apparent than real. It is almost certainly due in large measure to a
  progressive change in one or both of the units of frequency. In the
  case of sun-spots, A. Schuster (13) has compared J.R. Wolf and A.
  Wolfer's frequencies with data obtained by other observers for areas
  of sun-spots, and his figures show unquestionably that the unit in one
  or other set of data must have varied appreciably from time to time.
  Wolf and Wolfer have, however, aimed persistently at securing a
  definite standard, and there are several reasons for believing that
  the change of unit has been in the auroral rather than the sun-spot
  frequency. R. Rubenson (14), from whom Tromholt derives his data for
  Sweden, seems to accept this view, assigning the apparent increase in
  auroral frequency since 1860 to the institution by the state of
  meteorological stations in 1859, and to the increased interest taken
  in the subject since 1865 by the university of Upsala. The figures
  themselves in Table V. certainly point to this conclusion, unless we
  are prepared to believe that auroras have increased enormously in
  number. If, for instance, we compare the first and the last three
  11-year cycles for which Table V. gives complete data, we obtain as
  yearly means:--

    1749-1781    Sun-spots 56.4   Auroras  77.5
    1844-1876        "     55.8      "    112.2

  The mean sun-spot frequencies in the two periods differ by only 1%,
  but the auroral frequency in the later period is 45% in excess of that
  in the earlier.

  The above figures would be almost conclusive if it were not for the
  conspicuous differences that exist between the mean sun-spot
  frequencies for different 11-year periods. Schuster, who has
  considered the matter very fully, has found evidence of the existence
  of other periods--notably 8.4 and 4.8 years--in addition to the
  recognized period of 11.125 years, and he regards the difference
  between the maxima in successive 11-year periods as due at least
  partly to an overlapping of maxima from the several periodic terms.
  This cannot, however, account for all the fluctuations observed in
  sun-spot frequencies, unless other considerably longer periods exist.
  There has been at least one 33-year period during which the mean value
  of sun-spot frequency has been exceptionally low, and, as we shall
  see, there was a corresponding remarkable scarcity of auroras. The
  period in question may be regarded as extending from 1794 to 1826
  inclusive. Comparing it with the two adjacent periods of thirty-three
  years, we obtain the following for the mean annual frequencies:--

    +-----------------+------------+----------+
    | 33-Year Period. | Sun-spots. | Auroras. |
    +-----------------+------------+----------+
    |    1761-1793    |    65.6    |   76.1   |
    |    1794-1826    |    20.3    |   39.5   |
    |    1827-1859    |    56.1    |   84.4   |
    +-----------------+------------+----------+

  12. The association of high auroral and sun-spot frequencies shown in
  Table V. is not peculiar to Scandinavia. It is shown, for instance, in
  Loomis's auroral data, which are based on observations at a variety of
  European and American stations (_Ency. Brit._ 9th ed. art.
  METEOROLOGY, Table XXVIII.). It does not seem, however, to apply
  universally. Thus at Godthaab we have, according to Adam Paulsen (15),
  comparing 3-year periods of few and many sun-spots:--

    +----------------+----------------+--------------+
    | 3-Year Period. | Total Sun-spot | Total Nights |
    |                |   Frequency.   |  of Aurora.  |
    +----------------+----------------+--------------+
    |   1865-1868    |       48       |     274      |
    |   1869-1872    |      339       |     138      |
    |   1876-1879    |       23       |     273      |
    +----------------+----------------+--------------+

  The years start in the autumn, and 1865-1868 includes the three
  winters of 1865 to '66, '66 to '67, and '67 to '68. Paulsen also gives
  data from two other stations in Greenland, viz. Ivigtut (1869 to 1879)
  and Jakobshavn (1873 to 1879), which show the same phenomenon as at
  Godthaab in a prominent fashion. Greenland lies to the north of
  Fritz's curve of maximum auroral frequency, and the suggestion has
  been made that the zone of maximum frequency expands to the south as
  sun-spots increase, and contracts again as they diminish, the number
  of auroras at a given station increasing or diminishing as the zone of
  maximum frequency approaches to or recedes from it. This theory,
  however, does not seem to fit all the facts and stands in want of
  confirmation.

    TABLE V.

    +-------+----------------------++-------+----------------------+
    |       |      Frequency.      ||       |      Frequency.      |
    | Year. +----------------------++ Year. +----------------------+
    |       | Sun-spot. | Auroral. ||       | Sun-spot. | Auroral. |
    +-------+-----------+----------++-------+-----------+----------+
    | 1749  |   80.9    |    103   || 1829  |   67.0    |     93   |
    | 1750  |   83.4    |    134   || 1830  |   71.0    |    132   |
    | 1751  |   47.7    |     53   || 1831  |   47.8    |     89   |
    | 1752  |   47.8    |    111   || 1832  |   27.5    |     54   |
    | 1753  |   30.7    |     96   || 1833  |    8.5    |     79   |
    | 1754  |   12.2    |     65   || 1834  |   13.2    |     81   |
    | 1755  |    9.6    |     34   || 1835  |   56.9    |     58   |
    | 1756  |   10.2    |     60   || 1836  |  121.5    |     98   |
    | 1757  |   32.4    |     83   || 1837  |  138.3    |    137   |
    | 1758  |   47.6    |     80   || 1838  |  103.2    |    159   |
    | 1759  |   54.0    |    113   || 1839  |   85.8    |    165   |
    | 1760  |   62.9    |     86   || 1840  |   63.2    |     82   |
    | 1761  |   85.9    |    124   || 1841  |   36.8    |     75   |
    | 1762  |   61.2    |    114   || 1842  |   24.2    |     91   |
    | 1763  |   45.1    |     89   || 1843  |   10.7    |     66   |
    | 1764  |   36.4    |    107   || 1844  |   15.0    |     81   |
    | 1765  |   20.9    |     76   || 1845  |   40.1    |     26   |
    | 1766  |   11.4    |     51   || 1846  |   61.5    |     50   |
    | 1767  |   37.8    |     68   || 1847  |   98.5    |     63   |
    | 1768  |   69.8    |     80   || 1848  |  124.3    |    107   |
    | 1769  |  106.1    |     89   || 1849  |   95.9    |    131   |
    | 1770  |  100.8    |     83   || 1850  |   66.5    |     95   |
    | 1771  |   81.6    |     62   || 1851  |   64.5    |     60   |
    | 1772  |   66.5    |     38   || 1852  |   54.2    |     92   |
    | 1773  |   34.8    |     58   || 1853  |   39.0    |     65   |
    | 1774  |   30.6    |     98   || 1854  |   20.6    |     64   |
    | 1775  |    7.0    |     33   || 1855  |    6.7    |     49   |
    | 1776  |   19.8    |     17   || 1856  |    4.3    |     46   |
    | 1777  |   92.5    |     64   || 1857  |   22.8    |     38   |
    | 1778  |  154.4    |     59   || 1858  |   54.8    |     88   |
    | 1779  |  125.9    |     60   || 1859  |   93.8    |    131   |
    | 1780  |   84.8    |     67   || 1860  |   95.7    |    119   |
    | 1781  |   68.1    |    103   || 1861  |   77.2    |    127   |
    | 1782  |   38.5    |     67   || 1862  |   59.1    |    135   |
    | 1783  |   22.8    |     70   || 1863  |   44.0    |    135   |
    | 1784  |   10.2    |     78   || 1864  |   47.0    |    124   |
    | 1785  |   24.1    |     83   || 1865  |   30.5    |    119   |
    | 1786  |   82.9    |    136   || 1866  |   16.3    |    130   |
    | 1787  |  132.0    |    115   || 1867  |    7.3    |    127   |
    | 1788  |  130.9    |     97   || 1868  |   37.3    |    144   |
    | 1789  |  118.1    |     89   || 1869  |   73.9    |    160   |
    | 1790  |   89.9    |     90   || 1870  |  139.1    |    195   |
    | 1791  |   66.6    |     54   || 1871  |  111.2    |    185   |
    | 1792  |   60.0    |     64   || 1872  |  101.7    |    200   |
    | 1793  |   46.9    |     29   || 1873  |   66.3    |    189   |
    | 1794  |   41.0    |     37   || 1874  |   44.7    |    158   |
    | 1795  |   21.3    |     34   || 1875  |   17.1    |    133   |
    | 1796  |   16.0    |     37   || 1876  |   11.3    |    137   |
    | 1797  |    6.4    |     61   || 1877  |   12.3    |    126   |
    | 1798  |    4.1    |     35   || 1878  |    3.4    |    ..    |
    | 1799  |    6.8    |     28   || 1879  |    6.0    |    ..    |
    | 1800  |   14.5    |     30   || 1880  |   32.3    |    ..    |
    | 1801  |   34.0    |     34   || 1881  |   54.3    |    ..    |
    | 1802  |   45.0    |     65   || 1882  |   59.7    |    ..    |
    | 1803  |   43.1    |     73   || 1883  |   63.7    |    ..    |
    | 1804  |   47.5    |    101   || 1884  |   63.5    |    ..    |
    | 1805  |   42.2    |     85   || 1885  |   52.2    |    ..    |
    | 1806  |   28.1    |     62   || 1886  |   25.4    |    ..    |
    | 1807  |   10.1    |     42   || 1887  |   13.1    |    ..    |
    | 1808  |    8.1    |     20   || 1888  |    6.8    |    ..    |
    | 1809  |    2.5    |     20   || 1889  |    6.3    |    ..    |
    | 1810  |    0.0    |      4   || 1890  |    7.1    |    ..    |
    | 1811  |    1.4    |     13   || 1891  |   35.6    |    ..    |
    | 1812  |    5.0    |     11   || 1892  |   73.0    |    ..    |
    | 1813  |   12.2    |     18   || 1893  |   84.9    |    ..    |
    | 1814  |   13.9    |     17   || 1894  |   78.0    |    ..    |
    | 1815  |   35.4    |     10   || 1895  |   64.0    |    ..    |
    | 1816  |   45.8    |     33   || 1896  |   41.8    |    ..    |
    | 1817  |   41.1    |     60   || 1897  |   26.2    |    ..    |
    | 1818  |   30.4    |     74   || 1898  |   26.7    |    ..    |
    | 1819  |   23.9    |     43   || 1899  |   12.1    |    ..    |
    | 1820  |   15.7    |     62   || 1900  |    9.5    |    ..    |
    | 1821  |    6.6    |     37   || 1901  |    2.7    |    ..    |
    | 1822  |    4.0    |     33   || 1902  |    5.0    |    ..    |
    | 1823  |    1.8    |     13   || 1903  |   24.4    |    ..    |
    | 1824  |    8.5    |     14   || 1904  |   42.0    |    ..    |
    | 1825  |   16.6    |     40   || 1905  |   62.8    |    ..    |
    | 1826  |   36.3    |     58   || 1906  |   53.8    |    ..    |
    | 1827  |   49.7    |     79   || 1907  |   62.0    |    ..    |
    | 1828  |   62.5    |     60   || 1908  |   48.5    |    ..    |
    +-------+-----------+----------++-------+-----------+----------+

13. _Auroral Meridian._--It is a common belief that the summit of an
auroral arc is to be looked for in the observer's magnetic meridian. On
any theory it would be rather extraordinary if this were invariably
true. In temperate latitudes auroral arcs are seldom near the zenith,
and there is reason to believe them at very great heights. In high
latitudes the average height is probably less, but the direction in
which the magnetic needle points changes rapidly with change of
latitude and longitude, and has a large diurnal variation. Thus there
must in general be a difference between the observer's magnetic
meridian--answering to the mean position of the magnetic needle at his
station--and the direction the needle would have at a given hour, if
undisturbed by the aurora, at any spot where the phenomena which the
observer sees as aurora exist.

  Very elaborate observations have been made during several Arctic
  expeditions of the azimuths of the summits of auroral arcs. At Cape
  Thorsden (7) in 1882-1883 the mean azimuth derived from 371 arcs was
  24° 12' W., or 11° 27' to the W. of the magnetic meridian. As to the
  azimuths in individual cases, 130 differed from the mean by less than
  10°, 118 by from 10° to 20°, 82 by from 20° to 30°, 21 by from 30° to
  40°, 14 by from 40° to 50°; in six cases the departure exceeded 50°,
  and in one case it exceeded 70°. Also, whilst the mean azimuths
  deduced from the observations between 6 A.M. and noon, between noon
  and 6 P.M., and between 6 P.M. and midnight, were closely alike, their
  united mean being 22.4° W. of N. (or E. of S.), the mean derived from
  the 113 arcs observed between midnight and 6 A.M. was 47.8° W. At Jan
  Mayen (8) in 1882-1883 the mean azimuth of the summit of the arcs was
  28.8° W. of N., thus approaching much more closely to the magnetic
  meridian 29.9° W. As to individual azimuths, 113 lay within 10° of the
  mean, 37 differed by from 10° to 20°, 18 by from 20° to 30°, 6 by from
  30° to 40°, whilst 6 differed by over 40°. Azimuths were also measured
  at Jan Mayen for 338 auroral bands, the mean being 22.0° W., or 7.9°
  to the east of the magnetic meridian. Combining the results from arcs
  and bands, Carlheim-Gyllensköld gives the "anomaly" of the auroral
  meridian at Jan Mayen as 5.7° E. At the British Polar station of 1882,
  Fort Rae (62° 23' N. lat., 115° 44' W. long.), he makes it 15.7° W. At
  Godthaab in 1882-1883 the auroral anomaly was, according to Paulsen,
  15.5° E., the magnetic meridian lying 57.6° W. of the astronomical.

14. _Auroral Zenith._--Another auroral direction having apparently a
close relation to terrestrial magnetism is the imaginary line drawn to
the eye of an observer from the centre of the corona--i.e. the point to
which the auroral rays converge. This seems in general to be nearly
coincident with the direction of the dipping needle.

  Thus at Cape Thorsden (7) in 1882-1883 the mean of a considerable
  number of observations made the angle between the two directions only
  1° 7', the magnetic inclination being 80° 35', whilst the coronal
  centre had an altitude of 79° 55' and lay somewhat to the west of the
  magnetic meridian. Even smaller mean values have been found for the
  angle between the auroral and magnetic "zeniths"--as the two
  directions have been called--e.g. 0° 50' at Bossekop (16) in
  1838-1839, and 0° 7' at Treurenberg (17) (79° 55' N. lat., 16° 51' E.
  long.) in 1899-1900.

15. _Relations to Magnetic Storms._--That there is an intimate connexion
between aurora when visible in temperate latitudes and terrestrial
magnetism is hardly open to doubt. A bright aurora visible over a large
part of Europe seems always accompanied by a magnetic storm and earth
currents, and the largest magnetic storms and the most conspicuous
auroral displays have occurred simultaneously. Noteworthy examples are
afforded by the auroras and magnetic storms of August 28-29 and
September 1-2, 1859; February 4, 1872; February 13-14 and August 12,
1892; September 9, 1898; and October 31, 1903. On some of these
occasions aurora was brilliant in both the northern and southern
hemispheres, whilst magnetic disturbances were experienced the whole
world over. In high latitudes, however, where both auroras and magnetic
storms are most numerous, the connexion between them is much less
uniform. Arctic observers, both Danish and British, have repeatedly
reported displays of aurora unaccompanied by any special magnetic
disturbance. This has been more especially the case when the auroral
light has been of a diffused character, showing only minor variability.
When there has been much apparent movement, and brilliant changes of
colour in the aurora, magnetic disturbance has nearly always accompanied
it. In the Arctic, auroral displays seem sometimes to be very local, and
this may be the explanation. On the other hand, Arctic observers have
reported an apparent connexion of a particularly definite character.
According to Paulsen (18), during the Ryder expedition in 1891-1892, the
following phenomenon was seen at least twenty times by Lieut. Vedel at
Scoresby Sound (70° 27' N. lat., 26° 10' W. long.). An auroral curtain
travelling with considerable velocity would approach from the south,
pass right overhead and retire to the north. As the curtain approached,
the compass needle always deviated to the west, oscillated as the
curtain passed the zenith, and then deviated to the east. The behaviour
of the needle, as Paulsen points out, is exactly what it should be if
the space occupied by the auroral curtain were traversed by electric
currents directed upwards from the ground. The Danish observers at
Tasiusak (10) in 1898-1899 observed this phenomenon occasionally in a
slightly altered form. At Tasiusak the auroral curtain after reaching
the zenith usually retired in the direction from which it had come. The
direction in which the compass needle deviated was west or east,
according as the curtain approached from the south or the north; as the
curtain retired the deviation eventually diminished.

  Kr. Birkeland (19). who has made a special study of magnetic
  disturbances in the Arctic, proceeding on the hypothesis that they
  arise from electric currents in the atmosphere, and who has thence
  attempted to deduce the position and intensity of these currents,
  asserts that whilst in the case of many storms the data were
  insufficient, when it was possible to fix the position of the mean
  line of flow of the hypothetical current relatively to an auroral arc,
  he invariably found the directions coincident or nearly so.

16. In the northern hemisphere to the south of the zone of greatest
frequency, the part of the sky in which aurora most generally appears is
the magnetic north. In higher latitudes auroras are most often seen in
the south. The relative frequency in the two positions seems to vary
with the hour, the type of aurora, probably with the season of the year,
and possibly with the position of the year in the sun-spot cycle.

  At Jan Mayen (8) in 1882-1883, out of 177 arcs whose position was
  accurately determined, 44 were seen in the north, their summits
  averaging 38.5° above the northern horizon; 88 were seen in the south,
  their average altitude above the southern horizon being 33.5°; while
  45 were in the zenith. At Tasiusak (10) in 1898-1899 the magnetic
  directions of the principal types were noted separately. The results
  are given in Table VI.

  TABLE VI.

  +--------+----------------------------------------------+------------+
  | Direc- |        Absolute Number for each Type.        | Percentage |
  |  tion. +-------+--------+-----------+-------+---------+  from all  |
  |        | Arcs. | Bands. | Curtains. | Rays. | Patches.|   Types.   |
  +--------+-------+--------+-----------+-------+---------+------------+
  |   N.   |   9   |   16   |     5     |  15   |    4    |     10     |
  |  N.E.  |   9   |   13   |     2     |  20   |    4    |      9     |
  |   E.   |   3   |   11   |     2     |  26   |    3    |      9     |
  |  S.E.  |   5   |    6   |     1     |  10   |    7    |      6     |
  |   S.   |  45   |   43   |     1     |  16   |   15    |     24     |
  |  S.W.  |   9   |    9   |     2     |  12   |   13    |      9     |
  |   W.   |   3   |   11   |     2     |  22   |    6    |      9     |
  |  N.W.  |   2   |    8   |     2     |   8   |    5    |      5     |
  +--------+-------+--------+-----------+-------+---------+------------+

Table VI. accounts for only 81% of the total displays; of the remainder
15% appeared in the zenith, while 4% covered the whole sky. Auroral
displays generally cover a considerable area, and are constantly
changing, so the figures are necessarily somewhat rough. But clearly,
whilst the arcs and bands, and to a lesser extent the patches, showed a
marked preference for the magnetic meridian, the rays showed no such
preference.

  At Cape Thorsden (7) in 1882-1883 auroras as a whole were divided into
  those seen in the north and those seen in the south. The variation
  throughout the twenty-four hours in the percentage seen in the south
  was as follows:--

    +--------+------+------+------+-------+
    |  Hour. | 0-3. | 3-6. | 6-9. | 9-12. |
    +--------+------+------+------+-------+
    |  A.M.  |  69  |  55  |  44  |   35  |
    |  P.M.  |  55  |  70  |  65  |   65  |
    +--------+------+------+------+-------+

  The mean from the whole twenty-four hours is sixty-three. Between 3
  A.M. and 3 P.M. the percentage of auroras seen in the south thus
  appears decidedly below the mean.

  17. The following data for the apparent angular width of arcs were
  obtained at Cape Thorsden, the arcs being grouped according to the
  height of the lower edge above the horizon. Group I. contained thirty
  arcs whose altitudes did not exceed 11° 45'; Group II. thirty arcs
  whose altitudes lay between 12° and 35°; and Group III, thirty arcs
  whose altitudes lay between 36° and 80°.

    +-----------------+--------+--------+----------+
    |      Group.     |   I.   |   II.  |   III.   |
    +-----------------+--------+--------+----------+
    | Greatest width  | 11.5°  | 12.0°  |   21.0°  |
    | Least      "    |  1.0°  |  0.75° |    2.0°  |
    | Mean       "    |  3.45° |  4.6°  |    6.9°  |
    +-----------------+--------+--------+----------+

  There is here a distinct tendency for the width to increase with the
  altitude. At the same time, arcs near the horizon often appeared wider
  than others near the zenith. Furthermore, Gyllensköld says that when
  arcs mounted, as they not infrequently did, from the horizon, their
  apparent width might go on increasing right up to the zenith, or it
  might increase until an altitude of about 45° was reached and then
  diminish, appearing much reduced when the zenith was reached. Of
  course the phenomenon might be due to actual change in the arc, but it
  is at least consistent with the view that arcs are of two kinds, one
  form constituting a layer of no great vertical depth but considerable
  real horizontal width, the other form having little horizontal width
  but considerable vertical depth, and resembling to some extent an
  auroral curtain.

  18. According to numerous observations made at Cape Thorsden, the
  apparent angular velocity of arcs increases on the average with their
  altitude. Dividing the whole number of arcs, 156, whose angular
  velocities were measured into three numerically equal groups,
  according to their altitude, the following were the results in minutes
  of arc per second of time (or degrees per minute of time):--

    +-------------------+-------+--------+--------+------+
    |      Group.       |   I.  |   II.  |  III.  | All. |
    +-------------------+-------+--------+--------+------+
    | Mean altitude     | 10.5° | 34.6°  |  72.3° |  ..  |
    | Greatest velocity |  4.81 |  15.12 | 109.09 |  ..  |
    | Mean velocity     |  0.48 |  2.42  |   8.67 | 3.86 |
    +-------------------+-------+--------+--------+------+

  Each group contained auroras which appeared stationary. The intervals
  to which the velocities referred were usually from five to ten
  minutes, but varied widely. The velocity 109.09 was much the largest
  observed, the next being 52.38; both were from observations lasting
  under half a minute.

  19. In 1882-1883 the direction of motion of arcs was from north to
  south in 62% of the cases at Jan Mayen, and in 58% of the cases at
  Cape Thorsden. This seems the more common direction in the northern
  hemisphere, at least for stations to the south of the zone of maximum
  frequency, but a considerable preponderance of movements towards the
  north was observed in Franz Joseph Land by the Austrian Expedition of
  1872-1874. The apparent motion of arcs is sometimes of a complicated
  character. One end only, for example, may appear to move, as if
  rotating round the other; or the two ends may move in opposite
  directions, as if the arc were rotating about a vertical axis through
  its summit.

20. _Height._--If an auroral arc represented a definite self-luminous
portion of space of small transverse dimensions at a uniform height
above the ground, its height could be accurately determined by
observations made with theodolites at the two ends of a measured base,
provided the base were not too short compared to the height. If a very
long base is taken, it becomes increasingly open to doubt whether the
portions of space emitting auroral light to the observers at the two
ends are the same. There is also difficulty in ensuring that the
observations shall be simultaneous, an important matter especially when
the apparent velocity is considerable. If the base is short, definite
results can hardly be hoped for unless the height is very moderate.
Amongst the best-known theodolite determinations of height are those
made at Bossekop in Norway by the French Expedition of 1838-1839 (16)
and the Norwegian Expedition of 1882-1883, and those made in the latter
year by the Swedes at Cape Thorsden and the Danes at Godthaab. At
Bossekop and Cape Thorsden there were a considerable proportion of
negative or impossible parallaxes. Much the most consistent results were
those obtained at Godthaab by Paulsen (15). The base was 5.8 km. (about
3½ miles) long, the ends being in the same magnetic meridian, on
opposite sides of a fiord, and observations were confined to this
meridian, strict simultaneity being secured by signals. Heights were
calculated only when the observed parallax exceeded 1°, but this
happened in three-fourths of the cases. The calculated heights--all
referring to the lowest border of the aurora--varied from 0.6 to 67.8
km. (about 0.4 to 42 m.), the average being about 20 km. (12 m.).
Regular arcs were selected in most cases, but the lowest height obtained
was for a collection of rays forming a curtain which was actually
situated between the two stations.

  In 1885 Messrs Garde and Eherlin made similar observations at
  Nanortalik near Cape Farewell in Greenland, but using a base of only
  1250 metres (about ¾ m.). Their results were very similar to
  Paulsen's. On one occasion twelve observations, extending over half an
  hour, were made on a single arc, the calculated heights varying in a
  fairly regular fashion from 1.6 to 12.9 km. (about 1 to 8 m.). The
  calculated horizontal distances of this arc varied between 5 and 24
  km. (about 3 and 15 m.), the motion being sometimes towards, sometimes
  away from the observers, but not apparently exceeding 3 km. (nearly 2
  m.) per minute. Heights of arcs have often been calculated from the
  apparent altitudes at stations widely apart in Europe or America. The
  heights calculated in this way for the under surface of the arc, have
  usually exceeded 100 m.; some have been much in excess of this figure.
  None of the results so obtained can be accepted without reserve, but
  there are several reasons for believing that the average height in
  Greenland is much below that in lower latitudes. Heights have been
  calculated in various less direct ways, by observing for instance the
  angular altitude of the summit of an arc and the angular interval
  between its extremities, and then making some assumption such as that
  the portion visible to an observer may be treated as a circle whose
  centre lies over the so-called auroral pole. The mean height
  calculated at Arctic stations, where careful observations have been
  made, in this or analogous ways, has varied from 58 km. (about 36 m.)
  at Cape Thorsden (Gyllensköld) to 227 km. (about 141 m.) at Bossekop
  (Bravais). The height has also been calculated on the hypothesis that
  auroral light has its source where the atmospheric pressure is similar
  to that at which most brilliancy is observed when electric discharges
  pass in vacuum tubes. Estimates on this basis have suggested heights
  of the order of 50 km. (about 31 m.). There are, of course, many
  uncertainties, as the conditions of discharge in the free atmosphere
  may differ widely from those in glass vessels. If the Godthaab
  observations can be trusted, auroral discharges must often occur
  within a few miles of the earth's surface in Arctic regions. In
  confirmation of this view reference may be made to a number of
  instances where observers--e.g. General Sabine, Sir John Franklin,
  Prof. Selim Lemström, Dr David Walker (at Fort Kennedy in 1858-1859),
  Captain Parry (Fort Bowen, 1825) and others--have seen aurora below
  the clouds or between themselves and mountains. One or two instances
  of this kind have even been described in Scotland. Prof. Cleveland
  Abbe (20) has given a full historical account of the subject to which
  reference may be made for further details.

  21. _Brightness._--In auroral displays the brightness often varies
  greatly over the illuminated area and changes rapidly. Estimates of
  the intensity of the light have been based on various arbitrary
  scales, such for instance as the size of type which the observer can
  read at a given distance. The estimate depends in the case of reading
  type on the general illumination. In other cases scales have been
  employed which make the result mainly depend on the brightest part of
  the display. At Jan Mayen (8) in 1882-1883 a scale was employed
  running from 1, taken as corresponding to the brightness of the milky
  way, to 4, corresponding to full moonlight. The following is an
  analysis of the results obtained, showing the number of times the
  different grades were reached:--

    +------------+------+------+------+------+------------+
    |  Scale of  |  1.  |  2.  |  3.  |  4.  |    Mean    |
    | Intensity. |      |      |      |      | Intensity. |
    +------------+------+------+------+------+------------+
    | Arcs       |  27  |  53  |  13  |   1  |    1.87    |
    | Bands      |  46  |  83  |  49  |  22  |    2.24    |
    | Rays       |  30  | 116  | 138  |  28  |    2.21    |
    | Corona     |   3  |  14  |  12  |  12  |    2.81    |
    +------------+------+------+------+------+------------+

  On one or two occasions at Jan Mayen auroral light is described as
  making the full moon look like an ordinary gas jet in presence of
  electric light, whilst rays could be seen crossing and brighter than
  the moon's disk. Such extremely bright auroras seem very rare,
  however, even in the Arctic. There is a general tendency for both
  bands and rays to appear brightest at their lowest parts; arcs seldom
  appear as bright at their summits as nearer the horizon. It is not
  unusual for arcs and bands to look as if pulses or waves of light were
  travelling along them; also the direction in which these pulses travel
  does not seem to be wholly arbitrary. Movements to the east were twice
  as numerous at Jan Mayen and thrice as numerous at Traurenberg as
  movements to the west. In some cases changes of intensity take place
  round the auroral zenith, simulating the effect that would be produced
  by a cyclonic rotation of luminous matter. In the case of isolated
  patches the intensity often waxes and wanes as if a search-light were
  being thrown on and turned off.

22. _Colour._--The ordinary colour of aurora is white, usually with a
distinct yellow tint in the brighter forms, but silvery white when the
light is faint. When the light is intense and changing rapidly, red is
not infrequently present, especially towards the lower edge. Under these
circumstances, green is also sometimes visible, especially towards the
zenith. Thus a bright auroral ray may seem red towards the foot and
green at its summit, with yellow intervening. In some cases the green
may be only a contrast effect. Other colours, e.g. violet, have
occasionally been noticed but are unusual.

23. _Spectrum._--The spectrum of aurora consists of a number of lines.
Numerous measurements have been made of the wave-lengths of the
brightest. One line, in the yellow green, is so dominant optically as
often to be described as the auroral line. Its wave-length is probably
very near 5571 tenth-metres, and it is very close to, if not absolutely
coincident with, a prominent line in the spectrum of krypton. This line
is so characteristic that its presence or absence is the usual criterion
for deciding whether an atmospheric light is aurora. The Swedish
Expedition (17) of 1899-1902, engaged in measuring an arc of the meridian
in Spitsbergen, were unusually well provided spectrographically, and
succeeded in taking photographs of aurora in conjunction with artificial
lines--chiefly of hydrogen--which led to results claiming exceptional
accuracy. In the spectrograms three auroral rays--including the principal
one mentioned above--were pre-eminent. For the two shorter wave-lengths,
for whose measurement he claims the highest precision, the observer, J.
Westman, gives the values 4276.4 and 3913.5. In addition, he assigns
wave-lengths for 156 other auroral lines between wave-lengths 5205 and
3513. The following table gives the wave-lengths of the photographically
brightest of these, retaining four significant figures in place of
Westman's five.

  TABLE VII.

  +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
  |  4830  |  4489  |  4329  |  3997  |  3861  |
  |  4709  |  4420  |  4242  |  3986  |  3804  |
  |  4699  |  4371  |  4230  |  3947  |  3793  |
  |  4661  |  4356  |  4225  |  3937  |  3704  |
  |  4560  |  4344  |  4078  |  3880  |  3607  |
  |  4550  |  4337  |  4067  |  3876  |  3589  |
  +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+

There are a number of optically bright lines of longer wave-length. For
the principal of these Angot (1) gives the following wave-lengths (unit
1 µµ or 1 × 10^(-9) metre):--630, 578, 566, 535, 523, 500.

Out of a total of 146 auroral lines, with wave-lengths longer than 3684
tenth-metres, Westman identifies 82 with oxygen or nitrogen lines at the
negative pole in vacuum discharges. Amongst the lines thus identified
are the two principal auroral lines having wave-lengths 4276.4 and
3913.5. The interval considered by Westman contains at least 300 oxygen
and nitrogen lines, so that approximate coincidence with a number of
auroral lines was almost inevitable, and an appreciable number of the
coincidences may be accidental. E.C.C. Baly (21), making use of the
observations of the Russian expedition in Spitsbergen in 1899, accepts
as the wave-lengths of the three principal auroral lines 5570, 4276 and
3912; and he identifies all three and ten other auroral lines ranging
between 5570 and 3707 with krypton lines measured by himself. In
addition to these, he mentions other auroral lines as very probably
krypton lines, but in their case the wave-lengths which he quotes from
Paulsen (22) are given to only three significant figures, so that the
identification is more uncertain. The majority of the krypton lines
which Baly identifies with auroral lines require for their production a
Leyden jar and spark gap.

  If, as is now generally believed, aurora represents some form of
  electrical discharge, it is only reasonable to suppose that the
  auroral lines arise from atmospheric gases. The conditions, however,
  as regards pressure and temperature under which the hypothetical
  discharges take place must vary greatly in different auroras, or even
  sometimes in different parts of the same aurora. Further, auroras are
  often possessed of rapid motion, so that conceivably spectral lines
  may receive small displacements in accordance with Doppler's
  principle. Thus the differences in the wave-lengths of presumably the
  same lines as measured by different Arctic observers may be only
  partly due to unfavourable observational conditions. Many of the
  auroral lines seen in any single aurora are exceedingly faint, so that
  even their relative positions are difficult to settle with high
  precision.

  24. Whether or not auroral displays are ever accompanied by a
  characteristic sound is a disputed question. If sound waves originate
  at the seat of auroral displays they seem hardly likely to be audible
  on the earth, unless the aurora comes very low and great stillness
  prevails. It is thus to the Arctic one looks for evidence. According
  to Captain H.P. Dawson (26), in charge of the British Polar Station at
  Fort Rae in 1882-1883, "The Indians and _voyageurs_ of the Hudson Bay
  Company, who often pass their nights in the open, say that it [sound]
  is not uncommon ... there can be no doubt that distinct sound does
  occasionally accompany certain displays of aurora." On the one
  occasion when Captain Dawson says he heard it himself, "the sound was
  like the swishing of a whip or the noise produced by a sharp squall of
  wind in the upper rigging of a ship, and as the aurora brightened and
  faded so did the sound which accompanied it." If under these
  conditions the sound was really due to the aurora, the latter, as
  Captain Dawson himself remarks, must have been pretty close.

  25. Usually the electric potential near the ground is positive
  compared to the earth and increases with the height (see ATMOSPHERIC
  ELECTRICITY). Several Arctic observers, however, especially Paulsen
  (18) have observed a diminution of positive potential, or even a
  change to negative, for which they could suggest no explanation except
  the presence of a bright aurora. Other Arctic observers have failed to
  find any trace of this phenomenon. If it exists, it is presumably
  confined to cases when the auroral discharge comes unusually low.

  26. _Artificial Phenomena resembling Aurora._--At Sodankylä, the
  station occupied by the Finnish Arctic Expedition of 1882-1883, Selim
  Lemström and Biese (23) described and gave drawings of optical
  phenomena which they believed to be artificially produced aurora. A
  number of metallic points, supported on insulators, were connected by
  wires enclosing several hundred square metres on the top of a hill.
  Sometimes a Holtz machine was employed, but even without it
  illumination resembling aurora was seen on several occasions,
  extending apparently to a considerable height. In the laboratory, Kr.
  Birkeland (19) has produced phenomena bearing a striking resemblance
  to several forms of aurora. His apparatus consists of a vacuum vessel
  containing a magnetic sphere--intended to represent the earth--and the
  phenomena are produced by sending electric discharges through the
  vessel.

  27. _Theories._--A great variety of theories have been advanced to
  account for aurora. All or nearly all the most recent regard it as
  some form of electrical discharge. Birkeland (19) supposes the
  ultimate cause to be cathode rays emanating from the sun; C. Nordmann
  (24) replaces the cathode rays by Hertzian waves; while Svante
  Arrhenius (25) believes that negatively charged particles are driven
  through the sun's atmosphere by the Maxwell-Bartoli repulsion of light
  and reach the earth's atmosphere. For the size and density of
  particles which he considers most likely, Arrhenius calculates the
  time required to travel from the sun as forty-six hours. By modifying
  the hypothesis as to the size and density, times appreciably longer or
  shorter than the above would be obtained. Cathode rays usually have a
  velocity about a tenth that of light, but in exceptional cases it may
  approach a third of that of light. Hertzian waves have the velocity of
  light itself. On either Birkeland's or Nordmann's theory, the electric
  impulse from the sun acts indirectly by creating secondary cathode
  rays in the earth's atmosphere, or ionizing it so that discharges due
  to natural differences of potential are immensely facilitated. The
  ionized condition must be supposed to last to a greater or less extent
  for a good many hours to account for aurora being seen throughout the
  whole night. The fact that at most places the morning shows a marked
  decay of auroral frequency and intensity as compared to the evening,
  the maximum preceding midnight by several hours, is certainly
  favourable to theories which postulate ionization of the atmosphere by
  some cause or other emanating from the sun.

  AUTHORITIES.--The following works are numbered according to the
  references in the text:--(1) A. Angot, _Les Aurores polaires_ (Paris,
  1895); (2) H. Fritz, _Das Polarlicht_ (Leipzig, 1881); (3) Svante
  August Arrhenius, _Lehrbuch der kosmischen Physik_; (4) Joseph
  Lovering, "On the Periodicity of the Aurora Borealis," _Mem. American
  Acad._ vol. x. (1868); (5) Sophus Tromholt, _Catalog der in Norwegen
  bis Juni 1878 beobachteten Nordlichter_; (6) _Observations
  internationales polaires_ (1882-1883), _Expédition Danoise_, tome i.
  "Aurores boréales"; (7) Carlheim-Gyllensköld, "Aurores boréales" in
  _Observations faites au Cap Thorsden Spitzberg par l'expédition
  suédoise_, tome ii. 1; (8) "Die Österreichische Polar Station Jan
  Mayen" in _Die Internationale Polarforschung_, 1882-1883, Bd. ii.
  Abth. 1; (9) Henryk Arctowski, "Aurores australes" in _Expédition
  antarctique belge ... Voyage du S. Y. "Belgica"_; (10) G.C. Amdrup,
  _Observations ... faites par l'expédition danoise_; H. Ravn,
  _Observations de l'aurore boréale de Tasiusak_; (11) _K. Sven.
  Vet.-Akad. Hand_. Bd. 31, Nos. 2, 3, &c.; (12) _Sitz. d. k. Akad. d.
  Wiss._ (Vienna), Math. Naturw. Classe, Bd. xcvii. Abth. iia, 1888;
  (13) _Proc. Roy. Soc._, 1906, lxxvii. A, 141; (14) _Kongl. Sven.
  Vet.-Akad. Hand._ Bd. 15, No. 5, Bd. 18, No. 1; (15) _Bull. Acad. Roy.
  Danoise_, 1889, p. 67; (16) _Voyages ... pendant les années 1838, 1839
  et 1840 sur ... la Recherche_, "Aurores boréales," by MM. Lottin,
  Bravais, &c.; (17) _Missions scientifiques ... au Spitzberg ... en
  1899-1902, Mission suédoise_, tome ii. VIII^e Section, C. "Aurores
  boréales"; (18) _Bull. Acad. R. des Sciences de Danemark_, 1894, p.
  148; (19) Kr. Birkeland, _Expédition norvégienne 1899-1900 pour
  l'étude des aurores boréales_ (Christiania, 1901); (20) _Terrestrial
  Magnetism_, vol. iii. (1898), pp. 5, 53, 149; (21) _Astrophysical
  Journal_, 1904, xix. p. 187; (22) _Rapports présentés au Congrès
  International de Physique réuni à Paris_, 1900, iii. 438; (23)
  _Expédition polaire finlandaise_ (1882-1884), tome iii.; (24) Charles
  Nordmann, _Thèses présentées à la Faculté des Sciences de Paris_
  (1903); (25) _Terrestrial Magnetism_, vol. 10, 1905, p. 1; (26)
  _Observations of the International Polar Expeditions 1882-1883 Fort
  Rae_ ... by Capt. H.P. Dawson, R.A.     (C. Ch.)