AURUNCI, the name given by the Romans to a tribe which in historical
times occupied only a strip of coast on either side of the Mons Massicus
between the Volturnus and the Liris, although it must at an earlier
period have extended over a considerably wider area. Their own name for
themselves in the 4th century B.C. was _Ausones_, and in Greek writers
we find the name _Ausonia_ applied to Latium and Campania (see Strabo v.
p. 247; Aristotle, _Pol._ iv. (vii.) 10; Dion. Hal. i. 72), while in the
Augustan poets (e.g. Virgil, _Aen._ vii. 795) it is used as one of
many synonyms for Italy. In history the tribe appears only for a brief
space, from 340 to 295 B.C. (Mommsen, _C.I.L._ x. pp. 451, 463, 465),
and their struggle with the Romans ended in complete extermination;
their territory was parcelled out between the Latin colonies of Cales
(Livy viii. 16) and Suessa Aurunca (_id._ ix. 28) which took the place
of an older town called _Ausona_ (_id._ ix. 25; viii. 15), and the
maritime colonies Sinuessa (the older _Vescia_) and Minturnae (both in
295 B.C., Livy x. 21). The coin formerly attributed to Suessa Aurunca on
the strength of its supposed legend _Aurunkud_ has now been certainly
referred to Naples (see R.S. Conway, _Italic Dialects_, 145, and
_Verner's law in Italy_, p. 78, where the change of s to r is
explained as probably due to the Latin conquest). Seeing that the tribe
was blotted out at the beginning of the 3rd century B.C., we can
scarcely wonder that no record of its speech survives; but its
geographical situation and the frequency of the _co_-suffix in that
strip of coast (besides _Aurunci_ itself we have the names _Vescia_,
_Mons Massicus_, _Marica_, _Glanica_ and _Caedicii_; see _Italic
Dialects_, pp. 283 f.) rank them beyond doubt with their neighbours the
Volsci (q.v.).     (R. S. C.)