AUSONIUS, DECIMUS MAGNUS (c. 310-395), Roman poet and rhetorician, was
born at Burdigala [_Bordeaux_]. He received an excellent education,
especially in grammar and rhetoric, but confesses that his progress in
Greek was unsatisfactory. Having completed his studies, he practised for
some time as an advocate, but his inclination lay in the direction of
teaching. He set up (in 334) a school of rhetoric in his native place,
which was largely attended, his most famous pupil being Paulinus,
afterwards bishop of Nola. After thirty years of this work, he was
summoned by Valentinian to the imperial court, to undertake the
education of Gratian, the heir-apparent. The prince always entertained
the greatest regard for his tutor, and after his accession bestowed upon
him the highest titles and honours, culminating in the consulship (379).
After the murder of Gratian (383), Ausonius retired to his estates near
Burdigala. He appears to have been a (not very enthusiastic) convert to
Christianity. He died about 395.

His most important extant works are: in prose, _Gratiarum Actio_, an
address of thanks to Gratian for his elevation to the consulship;
_Periochae_, summaries of the books of the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_; and
one or two _epistolae_; in verse, _Epigrammata_, including several free
translations from the Greek Anthology; _Ephemeris_, the occupations of
a day; _Parentalia_ and _Commemoratio Professorum Burdigalensium_, on
deceased relatives and literary friends; _Epitaphia_, chiefly on the
Trojan heroes; _Caesares_, memorial verses on the Roman emperors from
Julius Caesar to Elagabalus; _Ordo Nobilium Urbium_, short poems on
famous cities; _Ludus Septem Sapientum_, speeches delivered by the Seven
Sages of Greece; _Idyllia_, of which the best-known are the _Mosella_, a
descriptive poem on the Moselle, and the infamous _Cento Nuptialis_. We
may also mention _Cupido Cruciatus_, Cupid on the cross;
_Technopaegion_, a literary trifle consisting of a collection of verses
ending in monosyllables; _Eclogarum Liber_, on astronomical and
astrological subjects; _Epistolae_, including letters to Paulinus and
Symmachus; lastly, _Praefatiunculae_, three poetical epistles, one to
the emperor Theodosius. Ausonius was rather a man of letters than a
poet; his wide reading supplied him with material for a great variety of
subjects, but his works exhibit no traces of a true poetic spirit; even
his versification, though ingenious, is frequently defective.

  There are no MSS. containing the whole of Ausonius's works. Editio
  princeps, 1472; editions by Scaliger 1575, Souchay 1730, Schenkl 1883,
  Peiper 1886; cf. _Mosella_, Böcking 1845, de la Ville de Mirmont
  (critical edition with translation) 1889, and _De Ausonii Mosella_,
  1892, Hosius 1894. See Deydou, _Un Poète bordelais_ (1868); Everat,
  _De Ausonii Operibus_ (1885); Jullian, _Ausone et Bordeaux_ (1893); C.
  Verrier and R. de Courmont, _Les Épigrammes d'Ausone_ (translation
  with bibliography, 1905); R. Pichon, _Les Derviers Écrivains profanes_
  (1907).