AUSTRALIA, the only continent entirely in the southern hemisphere. It
lies between 10° 39' and 39° 11½' S., and between 113° 5' and 153° 16'
E. Its greatest length is 2400 m. from east to west, and the greatest
breadth 1971 m. from north to south. The area is, approximately,
2,946,691 sq. m., with a coast line measuring about 8850 m. This is
equal to 1 m. to each 333 sq. m. of land, the smallest proportion of
coast shown by any of the continents.

PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

  General character.

_Physiography._--The salient features of the Australian continent are
its compact outline, the absence of navigable rivers communicating with
the interior, the absence of active volcanoes or snow-capped mountains,
its isolation from other lands, and its antiquity. Some of the most
profound changes that have taken place on this globe occurred in
Mesozoic times, and a great portion of Australia was already dry land
when vast tracts of Europe and Asia were submerged; in this sense,
therefore, Australia has been rightly referred to as one of the oldest
existing land surfaces. It has been described as at once the largest
island and the smallest continent on the globe. The general contours
exemplify the law of geographers in regard to continents, viz. as to
their having a high border around a depressed interior, and the highest
mountains on the side of the greatest ocean. On the N. Australia is
bounded by the Timor Sea, the Arafura Sea and Torres Strait; on the E.
by the Pacific Ocean; on the S. by Bass Strait and the Southern Ocean;
and on the W. by the Indian Ocean. It stands up from the ocean depths in
three fairly well-marked terraces. The basal plain of these terraces is
the bed of the ocean, which on the Pacific side has an average depth of
15,000 ft. From this profound foundation rise Australia, New Guinea and
Melanesia, in varying slopes. The first ledge rising from the ocean
floor has a depth averaging 8000 ft. below sea-level. The outer edge of
this ledge is roughly parallel to the coast of Western Australia, and
more than 150 m. from the land. Round the Australian Bight it continues
parallel to the coast, until south of Spencer Gulf (the basal ledge
still averaging 8000 ft. in depth) it sweeps southwards to lat. 55°, and
forms a submarine promontory 1000 m. long. The edge of the abysmal area
comes close to the eastern coasts of Tasmania and New South Wales,
approaching to within 60 m. of Cape Howe. The terrace closest to the
land, known as the continental shelf, has an average depth of 600 ft.,
and connects Australia, New Guinea, and Tasmania in one unbroken sweep.
Compared with other continents, the Australian continental shelf is
extremely narrow, and there are points on the eastern coast where the
land plunges down to oceanic depths with an abruptness rarely
paralleled. Off the Queensland coast the shelf broadens, its outer edge
being lined by the seaward face of the Great Barrier Reef. From Torres
Strait to Dampier Land the shelf spreads out, and connects Australia
with New Guinea and the Malay Archipelago. An elongation of the shelf to
the south joins Tasmania with the mainland. The vertical relief of the
land above the ocean is a very important factor in determining the
climate as well as the distribution of the fauna and flora of a
continent.

  The land mass of Australia rises to a mean height much less than that
  of any other continent; and the chief mountain systems are parallel
  to, and not far from, the coast-line. Thus, taking the continent as a
  whole, it may be described as a plateau, fringed by a low-lying
  well-watered coast, with a depressed, and for the most part arid,
  interior. A great plain, covering quite 500,000 sq. m., occupies a
  position a little to the east of a meridional line bisecting the
  continent, and south of the 22nd degree, but portions of it stretch
  upwards to the low-lying country south of the Gulf of Carpentaria. The
  contour of the continent in latitude 30° 5' is as follows:--a short
  strip of coastal plain; then a sharp incline rising to a mountain
  range 4000 ft. above sea-level, at a distance of 40 m. from the coast.
  From this a gently-sloping plateau extends to almost due north of
  Spencer Gulf, at which point its height has fallen almost to
  sea-level. Then there is a gentle rise to the low steppes, 500 to 1000
  ft. above sea-level. A further gentle rise in the high steppes leads
  to the mountains of the West Australian coast, and another strip of
  low-lying coastal land to the sea.

  With a circumference of 8000 m. Australia presents a contour
  wonderfully devoid of inlets from the sea except on its northern
  shores, where the coast-line is largely indented. The Gulf of
  Carpentaria, situated in the north, is enclosed on the east by the
  projection of Cape York, and on the west by Arnheim Land, and forms
  the principal bay on the whole coast, measuring about 6° of long. by
  6° of lat. Farther to the west, Van Diemen's Gulf, though much
  smaller, forms a better-protected bay, having Melville Island between
  it and the ocean; while beyond this, Queen's Channel and Cambridge
  Gulf form inlets about 14° 50' S. On the north-west of the continent
  the coast-line is much broken, the chief indentations being Admiralty
  Gulf, Collier Bay and King Sound, on the shores of Tasman Land.
  Western Australia, again, is not favoured with many inlets, Exmouth
  Gulf and Shark's Bay being the only bays of any size. The same remark
  may be made of the rest of the sea-board; for, with the exception of
  Spencer Gulf, the Gulf of St Vincent and Port Phillip on the south,
  and Moreton Bay, Hervey Bay and Broad Sound on the east, the
  coast-line is singularly uniform. There are, however, numerous
  spacious harbours, especially on the eastern coast, which are referred
  to in the detailed articles dealing with the different states. The
  Great Barrier Reef forms the prominent feature off the north-east
  coast of Australia; its extent from north to south is 1200 m., and it
  is therefore the greatest of all coral reefs. The channel between the
  reef and the coast is in places 70 m. wide and 400 ft. deep. There are
  a few clear openings in the outer rampart which the reef presents to
  the ocean. These are opposite to the large estuaries of the Queensland
  rivers, and might be thought to have been caused by fresh water from
  the land. The breaks are, however, some 30 to 90 m. away from land and
  more probably were caused by subsidence; the old river-channels known
  to exist below sea-level, as well as the former land connexion with
  New Guinea, seem to point to the conditions assumed in Darwin's
  well-known subsidence theory, and any facts that appear to be
  inconsistent with the theory of a steady and prolonged subsidence are
  explainable by the assumption of a slight upheaval.

  With the exception of Tasmania there are no important islands
  belonging geographically to Australia, for New Guinea, Timor and other
  islands of the East Indian archipelago, though not removed any great
  distance from the continent, do not belong to its system. On the east
  coast there are a few small and unimportant islands. In Bass Strait
  are Flinders Island, about 800 sq. m. in area, Clarke Island, and a
  few other small islands. Kangaroo Island, at the entrance of St
  Vincent Gulf, is one of the largest islands on the Australian coast,
  measuring 80 m. from east to west with an average width of 20 m.
  Numerous small islands lie off the western coast, but none has any
  commercial importance. On the north coast are Melville and Bathurst
  Islands; the former, which is 75 m. long and 38 m. broad, is fertile
  and well watered. These islands are opposite Port Darwin, and to the
  westward of the large inlet known as Van Diemen's Gulf. In the Gulf of
  Carpentaria are numerous islands, the largest bearing the Dutch name
  of Groote Eylandt.

    Mountains.

  Along the full length of the eastern coast extends a succession of
  mountain chains. The vast Cordillera of the Great Dividing Range
  originates in the south-eastern corner of the continent, and runs
  parallel with and close to the eastern shore, through the states of
  Victoria and New South Wales, right up to the far-distant York
  Peninsula in Queensland. In Victoria the greatest elevation is reached
  in the peaks of Mount Bogong (6508 ft.) and Mount Feathertop (6303
  ft.), both of which lie north of the Dividing Range; in the main range
  Mount Hotham (6100 ft.) and Mount Cobberas (6025 ft.) are the highest
  summits. In New South Wales, but close to the Victorian border, are
  found the loftiest peaks of Australia, Mount Kosciusco and Mount
  Townsend, rising to heights of 7328 and 7260 ft. respectively. The
  range is here called the Muniong, but farther north it receives the
  name of Monaro Range; the latter has a much reduced altitude, its
  average being only about 2000 ft. As the tableland runs northward it
  decreases both in height and width, until it narrows to a few miles
  only, with an elevation of scarcely 1500 ft.; under the name of the
  Blue Mountains the plateau widens again and increases in altitude, the
  chief peaks being Mount Clarence (4000 ft.), Mount Victoria (3525
  ft.), and Mount Hay (3270 ft.). The Dividing Range decreases north of
  the Blue Mountains, until as a mere ridge it divides the waters of the
  coastal rivers from those flowing to the Darling. The mass widens out
  once more in the Liverpool Range, where the highest peak, Mount Oxley,
  reaches 4500 ft., and farther north, in the New England Range, Ben
  Lomond reaches an elevation of 5000 ft. Near the Queensland border,
  Mount Lindsay, in the Macpherson Range, rises to a height of 5500 ft.
  In the latitude of Brisbane the chain swerves inland; no other peak
  north of this reaches higher than Mount Bartle Frere in the Bellenden
  Ker Range (5438 ft.). The Southern Ocean system of the Victorian
  Dividing Range hardly attains to the dignity of high mountains. An
  eastern system in South Australia touches at a few points a height of
  3000 ft.; and the Stirling Range, belonging to the south-western
  system of South Australia, reaches to 2340 ft. There are no mountains
  behind the Great Australian Bight. On the west the Darling Range faces
  the Indian Ocean, and extends from Point D'Entrecasteaux to the
  Murchison river. North of the Murchison, Mount Augustus and Mount
  Bruce, with their connecting highlands, cut off the coastal drainage
  from the interior; but no point on the north-west coast reaches a
  greater altitude than 4000 ft. Several minor ranges, the topography of
  which is little known, extend from Cambridge Gulf, behind a very much
  broken coast-line, to Limmen Bight on the Gulf of Carpentaria. Nothing
  is more remarkable than the contrast between the aspect of the coastal
  ranges on the north-east and on the south-east of the continent. The
  higher Australian peaks in the south-east look just what they are, the
  worn and denuded stumps of mountains, standing for untold ages above
  the sea. Their shoulders are lifted high above the tree-line. Their
  summits stand out gaunt and lonely in an unbroken solitude. Having
  left the tree-line far behind him, nothing is visible to the traveller
  for miles around but barren peaks and torn crags in indescribable
  confusion. A verdure of herbage clothes the valleys that have been
  scooped from the summits downwards. But there are no perpetual
  snow-fields, no glaciers creep down these valleys, and no alpine
  hamlets ever appear to break the monotony. The mountains of the
  north-east, on the contrary, are clothed to their summits with a rich
  and varied flora. Naked crags, when they do appear, lift themselves
  from a sea of green, and a tropical vegetation, quite Malaysian in
  character, covers everything.

  The absence of active volcanoes in Australia is a state of things, in
  a geological sense, quite new to the continent. Some of the volcanoes
  of the western districts of Victoria have been in eruption probably
  subsequent to the advent of the black-fellow. In some instances the
  cones are quite intact, and the beds of ash and scoriae are as yet
  almost unaffected by denuding agencies. Late in the Tertiary period
  vast sheets of lava poured from many points of the Great Dividing
  Range of eastern Australia. But it is notable that all recent volcanic
  action was confined to a wide belt parallel to the coast. No evidences
  of recent lava flows can be found in the interior over the great
  alluvial plain, the Lower, or the Higher Steppes. Nor has the
  continent, as a whole, in recent times been subjected to any violent
  earth tremors; though in 1873, to the north of Lake Amadeus, in
  central Australia, Ernest Giles records the occurrence of earthquake
  shocks violent enough to dislodge considerable rock masses.

  Australia possesses one mountain which, though not a volcano, is a
  "burning mountain." This is Mount Wingen, situated in a spur of the
  Liverpool Range and close to the town of Scone. Its fires are not
  volcanic, but result from the combustion of coal some distance
  underground, giving off much smoke and steam; geologists estimate that
  the burning has been going on for at least 800 years.

    Rivers.

  The coastal belt of Australia is everywhere well watered, with the
  exception of the country around the Great Australian Bight and Spencer
  Gulf. Flowing into the Pacific Ocean on the east coast there are some
  fine rivers, but the majority have short and rapid courses. In
  Queensland a succession of rivers falls into the Pacific from Cape
  York to the southern boundary of the state. The Burdekin is the finest
  of these, draining an area of 53,500 sq. m., and emptying into Upstart
  Bay; it receives numerous tributaries in its course, and carries a
  large body of fresh water even in the driest seasons. The Fitzroy
  river is the second in point of size; it drains an area of 55,600 sq.
  m., and receives several tributary streams during its course to Keppel
  Bay. The Brisbane river, falling into Moreton Bay, is important
  chiefly from the fact that the city of Brisbane is situated on its
  banks. In New South Wales there are several important rivers, the
  largest of which is the Hunter, draining 11,000 sq. m., and having a
  course of 200 m. Taking them from north to south, the principal rivers
  are the Richmond, Clarence, Macleay, Hastings, Manning, Hunter,
  Hawkesbury and Shoalhaven. The Snowy river has the greater part of its
  course in New South Wales, but its mouth and the last 120 m. are in
  Victoria. The other rivers worth mentioning are the Yarra, entering
  the sea at Port Phillip, Hopkins and Glenelg. The Murray (q.v.), the
  greatest river of Australia, debouches into Lake Alexandrina, and
  thence into the sea at Encounter Bay in South Australia. There are no
  other rivers of importance in South Australia, but the Torrens and the
  Gawler may be mentioned. Westward of South Australia, on the shores of
  the Australian Bight, there is a stretch of country 300 m. in length
  unpierced by any streams, large or small, but west of the bight,
  towards Cape Leeuwin, some small rivers enter the sea. The south-west
  coast is watered by a few streams, but none of any size; amongst these
  is the Swan, upon which Perth, the capital of Western Australia, is
  built. Between the Swan and North-West Cape the principal rivers are
  the Greenough, Murchison and Gascoyne; on the north-west coast, the
  Ashburton, Fortescue and De Grey; and in the Kimberley district, the
  Fitzroy, Panton, Prince Regent and the Ord. In the Northern Territory
  are several fine rivers. The Victoria river is navigable for large
  vessels for a distance of about 43 m. from the sea, and small vessels
  may ascend for another 80 m. The Fitzmaurice, discharging into the
  estuary of the Victoria, is also a large stream. The Daly, which in
  its upper course is called the Katherine, is navigable for a
  considerable distance, and small vessels are able to ascend over 100
  m. The Adelaide, discharging into Adam Bay, has been navigated by
  large vessels for about 38 m., and small vessels ascend still farther.
  The South Alligator river, flowing into Van Diemen's Gulf, is also a
  fine stream, navigable for over 30 m. by large vessels; the East
  Alligator river, falling into the same gulf, has been navigated for 40
  m. Besides those mentioned, there are a number of smaller rivers
  discharging on the north coast, and on the west shore of the Gulf of
  Carpentaria the Roper river discharges itself into Limmen Bight. The
  Roper is a magnificent stream, navigable for about 75 or 80 m. by
  vessels of the largest tonnage, and light draught vessels can ascend
  20 m. farther. Along the portion of the south shore of the Gulf of
  Carpentaria which belongs to Queensland and the east coast, many large
  rivers discharge their waters, amongst them the Norman, Flinders,
  Leichhardt, Albert and Gregory on the southern shore, and the Batavia,
  Archer, Coleman, Mitchell, Staaten and Gilbert on the eastern shore.
  The rivers flowing into the Gulf of Carpentaria, as well as those in
  the Northern Territory, drain country which is subject to regular
  monsoonal rains, and have the general characteristics of sub-tropical
  rivers.

  The network of streams forming the tributaries of the Darling and
  Murray system give an idea of a well-watered country. The so-called
  rivers have a strong flow only after heavy rains, and some of them do
  not ever reach the main drainage line. Flood waters disappear often
  within a distance of a few miles, being absorbed by porous soil,
  stretches of sand, and sometimes by the underlying bed-rocks. In many
  cases the rivers as they approach the main stream break up into
  numerous branches, or spread their waters over vast flats. This is
  especially the case with the tributaries of the Darling on its left
  bank, where in seasons of great rains these rivers overspread their
  banks and flood the flat country for miles around and thus reach the
  main stream. Lieutenant John Oxley went down the Lachlan (1817) during
  one of these periods of flood, and the great plains appeared to him to
  be the fringe of a vast inland sea. As a matter of fact, they are an
  alluvial deposit spread out by the same flood waters. The great rivers
  of Australia, draining inland, carve out valleys, dissolve limestone,
  and spread out their deposit over the plains when the waters become
  too sluggish to bear their burden farther. From a geological
  standpoint, the Great Australian Plain and the fertile valley of the
  Nile have had a similar origin. Taking the Lachlan as one type of
  Australian river, we find it takes its rise amongst the precipitous
  and almost unexplored valleys of the Great Dividing Range. With the
  help of its tributaries it acts as a denuding agent for 14,000 sq. m.
  of country, and carries its burden of sediment westwards. A point is
  reached about 200 m. from the Dividing Range, where the river ceases
  to act as a denuding agent, and the area of deposition begins, at a
  level of 250 ft. above the sea, but before the waters can reach the
  ocean they have still to travel about 1000 m.

  The Darling is reckoned amongst the longest rivers in the world, for
  it is navigable, part of the year, from Walgett to its confluence with
  the Murray, 1758 m., and then to the sea, a further distance of 587
  m.--making in all 2345 m. of navigable water. But this gives no
  correct idea of the true character of the Darling, for it can hardly
  be said to drain its own watershed. From the sources of its various
  tributaries to the town of Bourke, the river may be described as
  draining a watershed. But from Bourke to the sea, 550 m. in a direct
  line, the river gives rather than receives water from the country it
  flows through.

  The annual rainfall and the area of the catchment afford no measure
  whatever as to the size of a river in the interior of Australia. The
  discharge of the Darling river at Bourke does not amount to more than
  10% of the rainfall over the country which it drains. It was this
  remarkable fact which first led to the idea that, as the rainfall
  could not be accounted for either by evaporation or by the river
  discharge, much of the 90% unaccounted for must sink into the ground,
  and in part be absorbed by some underlying bed-rock. All Australian
  rivers, except the Murray and the Murrumbidgee, depend entirely and
  directly on the rainfall. They are flooded after rain, and in seasons
  of drought many of them, especially the tributaries of the Darling,
  become chains of ponds. Springs which would equalize the discharge of
  rivers by continuing to pour water into their beds after the rainy
  season has passed seem entirely absent in the interior. Nor are there
  any snowfields to feed rivers, as in the other continents. More
  remarkable still, over large tracts of country the water seems
  disposed to flow away from, rather than to, the river-beds. As the
  low-lying plains are altogether an alluvial deposit, the coarser
  sediments accumulate in the regions where the river first overflows
  its banks to spread out over the plains. The country nearest the river
  receiving the heaviest deposit becomes in this way the highest ground,
  and so continues until a "break-away" occurs, when a new river-bed is
  formed, and the same process of deposition and accumulation is
  repeated. As the general level of the country is raised by successive
  alluvial deposits, the more ancient river-beds become buried, but
  being still connected with the newer rivers at some point or other,
  they continue to absorb water. This underground network of old
  river-beds underlying the great alluvial plains must be filled to
  repletion before flood waters will flow over the surface. It is not
  surprising, therefore, that comparatively little of the rainfall over
  the vast extent of the great central plain ever reaches the sea by way
  of the river systems; indeed these systems as usually shown on the
  maps leave a false impression as to the actual condition of things.

    Steppes.

    Lakes.

  The great alluvial plain is one of Australia's most notable inland
  features; its extent is upwards of 500,000 sq. m., lying east of 135°
  W. and extending right across the continent from the Gulf of
  Carpentaria to the Murray river. The interior of the continent west of
  135° and north of the Musgrave ranges is usually termed by geographers
  the Australian Steppes. It is entirely different in all essential
  features from the great alluvial plains. Its prevailing aspect is
  characterized by flat and terraced hills, capped by desert sandstone,
  with stone-covered flats stretching over long distances. The country
  round Lake Eyre, where some of the land is actually below sea-level,
  comes under this heading. The higher steppes, as far as they are
  known, consist of Ordovician and Cambrian rocks, with an average
  elevation of 1500 to 3000 ft. above sea-level. Over this country
  water-courses are shown on maps. These run in wet seasons, but in
  every instance for a short distance only, and sooner or later they are
  lost in sand-hills, where their waters disappear and a line of stunted
  gum-trees (_Eucalyptus rostrata_) is all that is present to indicate
  that there may be even a soakage to mark the abandoned course. The
  steppes cover a surface of 400,000 sq. m., and from this vast expanse
  not a drop of the scanty rainfall reaches the sea; there is no leading
  drainage system and there are no rivers. Another notable feature of
  the interior is the so-called lake area, a district stretching to the
  north of Spencer Gulf. These lakes are expanses of brackish waters
  that spread or contract as the season is one of drought or rain. In
  seasons of drought they are hardly more than swamps and mud flats,
  which for a time may become a grassy plain, or desolate coast
  encrusted with salt. The country around is the dreariest imaginable,
  the surface is a dead level, there is no heavy timber and practically
  no settlement. Lake Torrens, the largest of these depressions,
  sometimes forms a sheet of water 100 m. in length. To the north again
  stretches Lake Eyre, and to the west Lake Gairdner. Some of these
  lake-beds are at or slightly below sea-level, so that a very slight
  depression of the land to the south of them would connect much of the
  interior with the Southern Ocean.     (T. A. C.)

  _Geology._--The states of Australia are divided by natural boundaries,
  which separate geographical areas having different characters, owing,
  mainly, to their different geological structures. Hence the general
  stratigraphical geology can be most conveniently summarized for each
  state separately, dealing here with the geological history of
  Australia as a whole. Australia is essentially the fragment of a great
  plateau land of Archean rocks. It consists in the main of an Archean
  block or "coign," which still occupies nearly the whole of the western
  half of the continent, outcrops in north-eastern Queensland, forms the
  foundation of southern New South Wales and eastern Victoria, and is
  exposed in western Victoria, in Tasmania, and in the western flank of
  the Southern Alps of New Zealand. These areas of Archean rocks were
  doubtless once continuous. But they have been separated by the
  foundering of the Coral Sea and the Tasman Sea, which divided the
  continent of Australia from the islands of the Australasian festoon;
  and the foundering of the band across Australia, from the Gulf of
  Carpentaria, through western Queensland and western New South Wales,
  to the lower basin of the Murray, has separated the Archean areas of
  eastern and western Australia. The breaking up of the old Archean
  foundation block began in Cambrian and Ordovician times. A narrow
  Cambrian sea must have extended across central Australia from the
  Kimberley Goldfield in the north-west, through Tempe Downs and the
  Macdonnell chain in central Australia, to the South Australian
  highlands, central Victoria at Mansfield, and northern Tasmania.
  Cambrian rocks occur in each of these districts, and they are best
  developed in the South Australian highlands, where they include a long
  belt of contemporary glacial deposits. Marine Ordovician rocks were
  deposited along the same general course. They are best developed in
  the Macdonnell chain in central Australia and in Victoria, where the
  fullest sequence is known; while they also extended north-eastward
  from Victoria into New South Wales, where, as yet, no Cambrian rocks
  have been found. The Silurian system was marked by the retreat of the
  sea from central Australia; but the sea still covered a band across
  Victoria, from the coast to the Murray basin, passing to the east of
  Melbourne. This Silurian sea was less extensive than the Ordovician in
  Victoria; but it appears to have been wider in New South Wales and in
  Queensland. The best Silurian sequence is in New South Wales. Silurian
  rocks are well developed in western Tasmania, and the Silurian sea
  must have washed the south-western corner of the continent, if the
  rocks of the Stirling Range be rightly identified as of this age.

  [Illustration: Geological map of Australia.]

  The Devonian system includes a complex series of deposits, which are
  of most interest in eastern Australia. This period was marked by
  intense earth movements, which affected the whole of the east
  Australian highlands. The Lower Devonian beds are in the main
  terrestrial, or coarse littoral deposits, and volcanic rocks. The
  Middle Devonian was marked by the same great transgression as in
  Europe and America; it produced inland seas, extending into Victoria,
  New South Wales and Queensland, in which were deposited limestones
  with a rich coral fauna. The Upper Devonian was a period of marine
  retreat; the crustal disturbances of the Lower Devonian were renewed
  and great quartz-pebble beaches were formed on the rising shore lines,
  producing the West Coast Range conglomerates of Tasmania, and the
  similar rocks to the south-east of Mansfield in Victoria. Intrusions
  of granitic _massifs_ in the Devonian period formed the primitive
  mountain axis of Victoria, which extends east and west across the
  state and forms the nucleus of the Victorian highlands. Similar
  granitic intrusions occurred in New South Wales and Queensland, and
  built up a mountain chain, which ran north and south across the
  continent; its worn-down stumps now form the east Australian
  highlands.

  The Carboniferous period began with a marine transgression, enabling
  limestones to form in Tasmania and New South Wales; and at the same
  time the sea first got in along the western edge of the western
  plateau, depositing the Carboniferous rocks of the Gascoyne basin and
  the coastal plain of north-western Australia. The Upper Carboniferous
  period was in the main terrestrial, and during it were laid down the
  coal-seams of New South Wales; they are best developed in the basin of
  the Hunter river, and they extend southward, covered by Mesozoic
  deposits, beyond Sydney. The Coal Measures become narrower in the
  south, until, owing to the eastward projection of the highlands, the
  Lower Palaeozoic rocks reach the coast. The coal-seams must have been
  formed in well-watered, lowland forests, at the foot of a high
  mountain range, built up by the Devonian earth movements. The
  mountains both in Victoria and New South Wales were snow-capped, and
  glaciers flowed down their flanks and laid down Carboniferous glacial
  deposits, which are still preserved in basins that flank the mountain
  ranges, such as the famous conglomerates of Bacchus Marsh, Heathcote
  and the Loddon valley in Victoria, and of Branxton and other
  localities in New South Wales. The age of the glacial deposits is
  later than the _Glossopteris_ flora and occurs early in the time of
  the _Gangamopteris_ flora. Kitson's work in Tasmania shows that there
  also the glacial beds may be correlated with the lower or Greta Coal
  Measures of New South Wales.

  The Permian deposits are best developed in New South Wales and
  Tasmania, where their characters show the continuation of the
  Carboniferous conditions. The Mesozoic begins with a Triassic land
  period in the mainland of Australia; while the islands of the
  Australasian festoon contain the Triassic marine limestones, which
  fringe the whole of the Pacific. The Triassic beds are best known in
  New South Wales, where round Sydney they include a series of
  sandstones and shales. They also occur in northern Tasmania.

  The Jurassic system is represented by two types. In Victoria,
  Tasmania, northern New South Wales and Queensland, there are Jurassic
  terrestrial deposits, containing the coal seams of Victoria, of the
  Clarence basin of north-eastern New South Wales, and of the Ipswich
  series in Queensland; the same beds range far inland on the western
  slopes of the east Australian highlands in New South Wales and
  Queensland and they occur, with coal-seams, at Leigh's Creek, at the
  northern foot of the South Australian highlands. They are also
  preserved in basins on the western plateau, as shown by brown coal
  deposits passed through in the Lake Phillipson bore. The second and
  marine type of the Jurassics occurs in Western Australia, on the
  coastal plain skirting the western foot of the western plateau.

  The Cretaceous period was initiated by the subsidence of a large area
  to the south of the Gulf of Carpentaria, whereby a Lower Cretaceous
  sea spread southward, across western Queensland, western New South
  Wales and the north-eastern districts of South Australia. In this sea
  were laid down the shales of the Rolling Downs formation. The sea does
  not appear to have extended completely across Australia, breaking it
  into halves, for a projection from the Archean plateau of Western
  Australia extended as far east as the South Australian highlands, and
  thence probably continued eastward, till it joined the Victorian
  highlands. The Cretaceous sea gradually receded and the plains of the
  Rolling Downs formation formed on its floor were covered by the
  sub-aerial and lacustrine deposits of the Desert Sandstone.

  The Kainozoic period opened with fresh earth movements, the most
  striking evidence of which are the volcanic outbreaks all round the
  Australian coasts. These movements in the south-east formed the Great
  Valley of Victoria, which traverses nearly the whole of the state
  between the Victorian highlands to the north, and the Jurassic
  sandstones of the Otway Ranges and the hills of south Gippsland. In
  this valley were laid down, either in Eocene or Oligocene times, a
  great series of lake beds and thick accumulations of brown coal.
  Similar deposits, of approximately the same age, occur in Tasmania and
  New Zealand; and at about the same time there began the Kainozoic
  volcanic period of Australasia. The first eruptions piled up huge
  domes of lavas rich in soda, including the geburite-dacites and
  sölvsbergites of Mount Macedon in Victoria, and the kenyte and
  tephrite domes of Dunedin, in New Zealand. These rocks were followed
  by the outpouring of the extensive older basalts in the Great Valley
  of Victoria and on the highlands of eastern Victoria, and also in New
  South Wales and Queensland. Then followed a marine transgression along
  most of the southern coast of Australia. The sea encroached far on the
  land from the Great Australian Bight and there formed the limestones
  of the Nullarbor Plains. The sea extended up the Murray basin into the
  western plains of New South Wales. Farther east the sea was
  interrupted by the still existing land-connexion between Tasmania and
  Victoria; but beyond it, the marine deposits are found again, fringing
  the coasts of eastern Gippsland and Croajingolong. These marine
  deposits are not found anywhere along the eastern coast of Australia;
  but they occur, and reach about the same height above sea-level, in
  New Guinea, and are widely developed in New Zealand. No doubt eastern
  Australia then extended far out into the Tasman Sea. The great
  monoclinal fold which formed the eastern face of the east Australian
  highlands, west of Sydney, is of later age. After this marine period
  was brought to a close the sea retreated. Tasmania and Victoria were
  separated by the foundering of Bass Strait, and at the same time the
  formation of the rift valley of Spencer Gulf, and Lake Torrens,
  isolated the South Australian highlands from the Eyre Peninsula and
  the Westralian plateau. Earth movements are still taking place both
  along Bass Strait and the Great Valley of South Australia, and
  apparently along the whole length of the southern coast of Australia.

  _The Flowing Wells of Central Australia._--The clays of the Rolling
  Downs formation overlie a series of sands and drifts, saturated with
  water under high pressure, which discharges at the surface as a
  flowing well, when a borehole pierces the impermeable cover. The first
  of these wells was opened at Kallara in the west of New South Wales in
  1880. In 1882, Dr W.L. Jack concluded that western Queensland might be
  a deep artesian basin. The Blackhall bore, put down at his advice from
  1885 to 1888, reached a water-bearing layer at the depth of 1645 ft.
  and discharged 291,000 gallons a day. It was the first of the deep
  artesian wells of the continent. As the plains on the Rolling Downs
  formation are mostly waterless, the discovery of this deep reservoir
  of water has been of great aid in the development of central
  Australia. In Queensland to the 30th of June 1904, 973 wells had been
  sunk, of which 596 were flowing wells, and the total flow was
  62,635,722 cub. ft. a day. The deepest well is that at Whitewood, 5046
  ft. deep. In New South Wales by the 30th of June 1903, the government
  had put down 101 bores producing 66 flowing wells and 22 sub-artesian
  wells, with a total discharge of 54,000,000 gallons a day; and there
  were also 144 successful private wells. In South Australia there are
  38 deep bores, from 20 of which there is a flow of 6,250,000 gallons a
  day.

  The wells were first called artesian in the belief that the ascent of
  the water in them was due to the hydrostatic pressure of water at a
  higher level in the Queensland hills. The well-water was supposed to
  have percolated underground, through the Blythesdale Braystone, which
  outcrops in patches on the eastern edge of the Rolling Downs
  formation. But the Blythesdale Braystone is a small local formation,
  unable to supply all the wells that have been sunk; and many of the
  wells derive their water from the Jurassic shales and mudstones. The
  difference in level between the outcrop of the assumed eastern intake
  and of the wells is often so small, in comparison with their distance
  apart, that the friction would completely sop up the whole of the
  available hydrostatic head. Many of the well-waters contain gases;
  thus the town of Roma is lighted by natural gas which escapes from its
  well. The chemical characters of the well-waters, the irregular
  distribution of the water-pressure, the distribution of the
  underground thermal gradients, and the occurrence in some of the wells
  of a tidal rise and fall of a varying period, are facts which are not
  explained on the simple hydrostatic theory. J.W. Gregory has
  maintained (_Dead Heart of Australia_, 1906, pp. 273-341) that the
  ascent of water in these wells is due to the tension of the included
  gases and the pressure of overlying sheets of rocks, and that some of
  the water is of plutonic origin.[1]     (J. W. G.)

_Climate._--The Australian continent, extending over 28° of latitude,
might be expected to show a considerable diversity of climate. In
reality, however, it experiences fewer climatic variations than the
other great continents, owing to its distance (28°) from the Antarctic
circle and (11°) from the equator. There is, besides, a powerful
determining cause in the uniform character and undivided extent of its
dry interior. The plains and steppes already described lie either within
or close to the tropics. They present to the fierce play of the sun
almost a level surface, so that during the day that surface becomes
intensely heated and at night gives off its heat by radiation.
Ordinarily the alternate expansion and contraction of the atmosphere
which takes place under such circumstances would draw in a supply of
moisture from the ocean, but the heated interior, covering some 900,000
sq. m., is so immense, that the moist air from the ocean does not come
in sufficient supply, nor are there mountain chains to intercept the
clouds which from time to time are formed; so that two-fifths of
Australia, comprising a region stretching from the Australian Bight to
20° S. and from 117° to 142° E., receives less than an average of 10 in.
of rain throughout the year, and a considerable portion of this region
has less than 5 in. No part of Victoria and very little of Queensland
and New South Wales lie within this area. The rest of the continent may
be considered as well watered. The north-west coast, particularly the
portions north of Cambridge Gulf and the shores of the Gulf of
Carpentaria, are favoured with an annual visitation of the monsoon from
December to March, penetrating as far as 500 m. into the continent, and
sweeping sometimes across western and southern Queensland to the
northern interior of New South Wales. It is this tropical downpour that
fills and floods the rivers flowing into Lake Eyre and those falling
into the Darling on its right bank. The whole of the east coast of the
continent is well watered. From Cape York almost to the tropic of
Capricorn the rainfall exceeds 50 in. and ranges to over 70 in. At
Brisbane the fall is 50 in., and portions of the New South Wales coast
receive a like quantity, but speaking generally the fall is from 30 in.
to 40 in. The southern shores of the continent receive much less rain.
From Cape Howe to Melbourne the fall may be taken at from 30 in. to 40
in., Melbourne itself having an average of 25.6 in. West of Port Phillip
the fall is less, averaging 20 in. to 30 in., diminishing greatly away
from the coast. Along the shores of Encounter Bay and St Vincent and
Spencer Gulfs, the precipitation ranges from 10 to 20 in., the yearly
rainfall at Adelaide is a little less than 21 in., while the head of
Spencer Gulf is within the 5 to 10 in. district. The rest of the
southern coast west as far as 124° E., with the exception of the
southern projection of Eyre Peninsula, which receives from 10 to 20 in.,
belongs to the district with from 5 to 10 in. annual rainfall. The
south-western angle of the continent, bounded by a line drawn diagonally
from Jurien river to Cape Riche, has an average of from 30 to 40 in.
annual rainfall, diminishing to about 20 to 30 in. in the country along
the diagonal line. The remainder of the south and west coast from 124°
E. to York Sound in the Kimberley district for a distance of some 150 m.
inland has a fall ranging from 10 to 20 in. The 10 to 20 in. rainfall
band circles across the continent through the middle of the Northern
Territory, embraces the entire centre and south-west of Queensland, with
the exception of the extreme south-western angle of the state, and
includes the whole of the interior of New South Wales to a line about
200 m. from the coast, as well as the western and northern portions of
Victoria and South Australia south of the Murray.

  The area of Australia subject to a rainfall of from 10 to 20 in. is
  843,000 sq. m. On the seaward side of this area in the north and east
  is the 20 to 30 in. annual rainfall area, and still nearer the sea are
  the exceptionally well-watered districts. The following table shows
  the area of the rainfall zones in square miles:--

                           Rainfall Area
       Rainfall.             in sq. m.

     Under 10 inches         1,219,600
     10 to 20   "              843,100
     20 to 30   "              399,900
     30 to 40   "              225,700
     40 to 50   "              140,300
     50 to 60   "               47,900
     60 to 70   "               56,100
     Over 70    "               14,100
                             ---------
                    Total    2,946,700

  The tropic of Capricorn divides Australia into two parts. Of these the
  northern or intertropical portion contains 1,145,000 sq. m.,
  comprising half of Queensland, the Northern Territory, and the
  north-western divisions of Western Australia. The whole of New South
  Wales, Victoria and South Australia proper, half of Queensland, and
  more than half of Western Australia, comprising 1,801,700 sq. m., are
  without the tropics. In a region so extensive very great varieties of
  climate are naturally to be expected, but it may be stated as a
  general law that the climate of Australia is milder than that of
  corresponding lands in the northern hemisphere. During July, which is
  the coldest month in southern latitudes, one-half of Australia has a
  mean temperature ranging from 45° to 61°, and the other half from 62°
  to 80°. The following are the areas subject to the various average
  temperatures during the month referred to:--

    Temperature          Area
       Fahr.           in sq. m.

      45°-50°           18,800
      50°-55°          506,300
      55°-60°          681,800
      60°-65°          834,400
      65°-70°          515,000
      70°-75°          275,900
      75°-80°           24,500

  The temperature in December ranges from 60° to above 95° Fahr., half
  of Australia having a mean temperature below 84°. Dividing the land
  into zones of average summer temperature, the following are the areas
  which would fall to each:--

    Temperature          Area
       Fahr.           in sq. m.

      60°-65°           67,800
      65°-70°           63,700
      70°-75°          352,300
      75°-80°          439,200
      80°-85°          733,600
      85°-90°          570,600
      90°-95°          584,100
      95° and over     135,400

  Judging from the figures just given, it must be conceded that a
  considerable area of the continent is not adapted for colonization by
  European races. The region with a mean summer temperature in excess of
  95° Fahr. is the interior of the Northern Territory north of the 20th
  parallel; and the whole of the country, excepting the seaboard, lying
  between the meridians of 120° and 140°, and north of the 25th
  parallel, has a mean temperature in excess of 90° Fahr.

    Queensland.

  The area of Australia is so large that the characteristics of its
  climate will not be understood without reference to the individual
  states. About one-half of the colony of Queensland lies in the
  tropics, the remaining area lying between the tropic and 29° S. The
  temperature, however, has a daily range less than that of other
  countries under the same isothermal lines. This circumstance is due to
  the sea-breezes, which blow with great regularity, and temper what
  would otherwise be an excessive heat. The hot winds which prevail
  during the summer in some of the other colonies are unknown in
  Queensland. Of course, in a territory of such large extent there are
  many varieties of climate, and the heat is greater along the coast
  than on the elevated lands of the interior. In the northern parts of
  the colony the high temperature is very trying to persons of European
  descent. The mean temperature at Brisbane, during December, January
  and February, is about 76°, while during the months of June, July and
  August it averages about 60°. Brisbane, however, is situated near the
  extreme southern end of the colony, and its average temperature is
  considerably less than that of many of the towns farther north. Thus
  the winter in Rockhampton averages nearly 65°, while the summer heat
  rises almost to 85°; and at Townsville and Normanton the average
  temperature is still higher. The average rainfall along the coast is
  high, especially in the north, where it ranges from 60 to 70 in. per
  annum, and along a strip of country south from Cape Melville to
  Rockingham Bay the average rainfall exceeds 70 in. At Brisbane the
  rainfall is about 50 in., taking an average of forty years. A large
  area of the interior is watered to the extent of 20 to 30 in. per
  annum, but in the west and south, more remote than from 250 to 300 m.,
  there is a rainfall of less than 20 in.

    New South Wales.

  Climatically, New South Wales is divided into three marked divisions.
  The coastal region has an average summer temperature ranging from 78°
  in the north to 67° in the south, with a winter temperature of from
  59° to 52°. Taking the district generally, the difference between the
  mean summer and mean winter temperatures may be set down as averaging
  not more than 20°, a range smaller than is found in most other parts
  of the world. Sydney, situated in latitude 33° 51' S., has a mean
  temperature of 62.9° Fahr., which corresponds with that of Barcelona
  in Spain and of Toulon in France, the former of these being in
  latitude 41° 22' N. and the latter in 43° 7' N. At Sydney the mean
  summer temperature is 70.8° Fahr., and that of winter 53.9°. The range
  is thus 16.9° Fahr. At Naples, where the mean temperature for the year
  is about the same as at Sydney, the summer temperature reaches a mean
  of 74.4°, and the mean of winter is 47.6°, with a range 26.8°. The
  mean temperature of Sydney for a long series of years was spring 62°,
  summer 71°, autumn 64°, winter 54°.

  Passing from the coast to the tableland, a distinct climatic region is
  entered. Cooma, with a mean summer temperature of 65.4°, and a mean
  winter temperature of 41.4°, may be taken as illustrative of the
  climate of the southern tableland, and Armidale of the northern. The
  yearly average temperature of the latter is scarcely 65.5°, while the
  summer only reaches 67.7°, and the winter falls to 44.4°.

  The climatic conditions of the western districts of the state are
  entirely different from those of the other two regions. The summer is
  hot, but on the whole the climate is very healthy. The town of Bourke,
  lying on the upper Darling, may be taken as an example of many of the
  interior districts, and illustrates peculiarly well the defects as
  well as the excellencies of the climate of the whole region. Bourke
  has exactly the same latitude as Cairo, yet its mean summer
  temperature is 1.3° less, and its mean annual temperature 4° less than
  that of the Egyptian city. New Orleans, also on the same parallel, is
  4° hotter in summer. As regards winter temperature Bourke leaves
  little to be desired. The mean winter reading of the thermometer is
  54.7, and accompanied as this is by clear skies and an absence of
  snow, the season is both pleasant and invigorating. The rainfall of
  New South Wales ranges from an annual average of 64 in. at various
  points on the northern coast, and at Kiandra in the Monaro district,
  to 9 in. at Milparinka in the trans-Darling district. The coastal
  districts average about 42 in. per annum, the tablelands 32 in., and
  the western interior has an average as low as 20 in. At Sydney, the
  average rainfall, since observations were commenced, has been 50 in.

    Victoria.

  The climate of Victoria does not differ greatly from that of New South
  Wales. The heat, however, is generally less intense in summer, and the
  cold greater in winter. Melbourne, which stands in latitude 37° 50'
  S., has a mean temperature of 57.3°, and therefore corresponds with
  Washington in the United States, Madrid, Lisbon and Messina. The
  difference between summer and winter is, however, less at Melbourne
  than at any of the places mentioned, the result of a long series of
  observations being spring 57°, summer 65.3°, autumn 58.7°, and winter
  49.2°. The highest recorded temperature in the shade at Melbourne is
  110.7°, and the lowest 27°, but it is rare for the summer heat to
  exceed 85°, or for the winter temperature in the daytime to fall below
  40°. Ballarat, the second city of Victoria, lies above 100 m. west
  from Melbourne at a height of 1400 ft. above sea-level. It has a
  minimum temperature of 29°, and a maximum of 104.5°, the average
  yearly mean being 54.1°. The rainfall of Melbourne averages 25.58 in.,
  the mean number of rainy days being 131.

    South Australia.

  South Australia proper extends over 26 degrees of latitude, and
  naturally presents considerable variations of climate. The coldest
  months are June, July and August, during which the temperature is very
  agreeable, averaging 53.6°, 51.7°, and 54° in those months
  respectively. On the plains slight frosts occur occasionally, and ice
  is sometimes seen on the highlands. In summer the sun has great
  power, and the temperature reaches 100° in the shade, with hot winds
  blowing from the interior. The weather on the whole is remarkably dry.
  At Adelaide there are on an average 120 rainy days per annum, with a
  mean rainfall of 20-88 in. The country is naturally very healthful, as
  evidence of which may be mentioned that no great epidemic has ever
  visited the state.

    Western Australia.

  Western Australia has practically only two seasons, the winter or wet
  season, which commences in April and ends in October, and the summer
  or dry season, which comprises the remainder of the Year. During the
  wet season frequent and heavy rains fall, and thunderstorms, with
  sharp showers, occur in the summer, especially on the north-west
  coast, which is sometimes visited by hurricanes of great violence. In
  the southern and early-settled parts of the state the mean temperature
  is about 64°, but in the more northern portions the heat is excessive,
  though the dryness of the atmosphere makes it preferable to moist
  tropical climates. The average rainfall at Perth is 33 in. per annum.

  The climate of the Northern Territory is extremely not, except on the
  elevated tablelands; altogether, the temperature of this part of the
  continent is very similar to that of northern Queensland, and the
  climate is not favourable to Europeans. The rainfall in the extreme
  north, especially in January and February, is very heavy, and the
  annual average along the coast is about 63 in. The whole of the
  peninsula north of 15° S. has a rainfall considerably exceeding 40 in.
  This region is backed by a belt of about 100 m. wide, in which the
  rainfall is from 30 to 40 in., from which inwards the rainfall
  gradually declines until between Central Mount Stuart and Macdonnell
  ranges it falls to between 5 and 10 in.

_Fauna and Flora._--The origin of the fauna and flora of Australia has
attracted considerable attention. Much accumulated evidence, biological
and geological, has pointed to a southern extension of India, an eastern
extension of South Africa, and a western extension of Australia into the
Indian Ocean. The comparative richness of proteaceous plants in Western
Australia and South Africa first suggested a common source for these
primitive types. Dr H.O. Forbes drew attention to a certain community
amongst birds and other vertebrates, invertebrates, and amongst plants,
on all the lands stretching towards the south pole. A theory was
therefore propounded that these known types were all derived from a
continent which has been named Antarctica. The supposed continent
extended across the south pole, practically joining Australia and South
America. Just as we have evidence of a former mild climate in the arctic
regions, so a similar mild climate has been postulated for Antarctica.
Modern naturalists consider that many of the problems of Australia's
remarkable fauna and flora can be best explained by the following
hypothesis:--The region now covered by the antarctic ice-cap was in
early Tertiary times favoured by a mild climate; here lay an antarctic
continent or archipelago. From an area corresponding to what is now
South America there entered a fauna and flora, which, after undergoing
modification, passed by way of Tasmania to Australia. These immigrants
then developed, with some exceptions, into the present Australian flora
and fauna. This theory has advanced from the position of a disparaged
heresy to acceptance by leading thinkers. The discovery as fossil, in
South America, of primitive or ancestral forms of marsupials has given
it much support. One of these, _Prothylacinus_, is regarded as the
forerunner of the marsupial wolf of Tasmania. An interesting link
between divergent marsupial families, still living in Ecuador, the
_Coenolestes_, is another discovery of recent years. On the Australian
side the fact that Tasmania is richest in marsupial types indicates the
gate by which they entered. It is not to be supposed that this antarctic
element, to which Professor Tate has applied the name _Euronotian_,
entered a desert barren of all life. Previous to its arrival Australia
doubtless possessed considerable vegetation and a scanty fauna, chiefly
invertebrate. At a comparatively recent date Australia received its
third and newest constituent. The islands of Torres Strait have been
shown to be the denuded remnant of a former extension of Cape York
peninsula in North Queensland. Previous to the existence of the strait,
and across its site, there poured into Australia a wealth of Papuan
forms. Along the Pacific slope of the Queensland Cordillera these found
in soil and climate a congenial home. Among the plants the wild banana,
pepper, orange and mangosteen, rhododendron, epiphytic orchids and the
palm; among mammals the bats and rats; among birds the cassowary and
rifle birds; and among reptiles the crocodile and tree snakes,
characterize this element. The numerous facts, geological, geographical
and biological, which when linked together lend great support to this
theory, have been well worked out in Australia by Mr Charles Hedley of
the Australian Museum, Sydney.

    Fauna.

  The zoology of Australia and Tasmania presents a very conspicuous
  point of difference from that of other regions of the globe, in the
  prevalence of non-placental mammalia. The vast majority of the
  mammalia are provided with an organ in the uterus, by which, before
  the birth of their young, a vascular connexion is maintained between
  the embryo and the parent animal. There are two orders, the
  Marsupialia and the Monotremata, which do not possess this organ; both
  these are found in Australia, to which region indeed they are not
  absolutely confined.

  The geographical limits of the marsupials are very interesting. The
  opossums of America are marsupials, though not showing anomalies as
  great as kangaroos and bandicoots (in their feet), and _Myrmecobius_
  (in the number of teeth). Except the opossums, no single living
  marsupial is known outside the Australian zoological region. The forms
  of life characteristic of India and the Malay peninsula come down to
  the island of Bali. Bali is separated from Lombok by a strait not more
  than 15 m. wide. Yet this narrow belt of water is the boundary line
  between the Australasian and the Indian regions. The zoological
  boundary passing through the Bali Strait is called "Wallace's line,"
  after the eminent naturalist who was its discoverer. He showed that
  not only as regards beasts, but also as regards birds, these regions
  are thus sharply limited. Australia, he pointed out, has no
  woodpeckers and no pheasants, which are widely-spread Indian birds.
  Instead of these it has mound-making turkeys, honey-suckers, cockatoos
  and brush-tongued lories, all of which are found nowhere else in the
  world.

  The marsupials constitute two-thirds of all the Australian species of
  mammals. It is the well-known peculiarity of this order that the
  female has a pouch or fold of skin upon her abdomen, in which she can
  place the young for suckling within reach of her teats. The opossum of
  America is the only species out of Australasia which is thus provided.
  Australia is inhabited by at least 110 different species of
  marsupials, which is about two-thirds of the known species; these have
  been arranged in five tribes, according to the food they eat, viz.,
  the grass-eaters (kangaroos), the root-eaters (wombats), the
  insect-eaters (bandicoots), the flesh-eaters (native cats and rats),
  and the fruit-eaters (phalangers).

  The kangaroo (_Macropus_) lives in droves in the open grassy plains.
  Several smaller forms of the same general appearance are known as
  wallabies, and are common everywhere. The kangaroo and most of its
  congeners show an extraordinary disproportion of the hind limbs to the
  fore part of the body. The rock wallabies again have short tarsi of
  the hind legs, with a long pliable tail for climbing, like that of the
  tree kangaroo of New Guinea, or that of the jerboa. Of the larger
  kangaroos, which attain a weight of 200 lb. and more, eight species
  are named, only one of which is found in Western Australia. Fossil
  bones of extinct kangaroo species are met with; these kangaroos must
  have been of enormous size, twice or thrice that of any species now
  living.

  There are some twenty smaller species in Australia and Tasmania,
  besides the rock wallabies and the hare kangaroos; these last are
  wonderfully swift, making clear jumps 8 or 10 ft. high. Other
  terrestrial marsupials are the wombat (_Phascolomys_), a large,
  clumsy, burrowing animal, not unlike a pig, which attains a weight of
  from 60 to 100 lb.; the bandicoot (_Perameles_), a rat-like creature
  whose depredations annoy the agriculturist; the native cat
  (_Dasyurus_), noted robber of the poultry yard; the Tasmanian wolf
  (_Thylacinus_), which preys on large game; and the recently discovered
  _Notoryctes_, a small animal which burrows like a mole in the desert
  of the interior. Arboreal species include the well-known opossums
  (_Phalanger_); the extraordinary tree-kangaroo of the Queensland
  tropics; the flying squirrel, which expands a membrane between the
  legs and arms, and by its aid makes long sailing jumps from tree to
  tree; and the native bear (_Phascolarctos_), an animal with no
  affinities to the bear, and having a long soft fur and no tail.

  The _Myrmecobius_ of Western Australia is a bushy-tailed ant-eater
  about the size of a squirrel, and from its lineage and structure of
  more than passing interest. It is, Mivart remarks, a survival of a
  very ancient state of things. It had ancestors in a flourishing
  condition during the Secondary epoch. Its congeners even then lived in
  England, as is proved by the fact that their relics have been found in
  the Stonesfield oolitic rocks, the deposition of which is separated
  from that which gave rise to the Paris Tertiary strata by an abyss of
  past time which we cannot venture to express even in thousands of
  years.

  We pass on to the other curious order of non-placental mammals, that
  of the Monotremata, so called from the structure of their organs of
  evacuation with a single orifice, as in birds. Their abdominal bones
  are like those of the marsupials; and they are furnished with pouches
  for their young, but have no teats, the milk being distilled into
  their pouches from the mammary glands. Australia and Tasmania possess
  two animals of this order--the echidna, or spiny ant-eater (hairy in
  Tasmania), and the _Platypus anatinus_, the duckbilled water mole,
  otherwise named the _Ornithorhynchus paradoxus_. This odd animal is
  provided with a bill or beak, which is not, like that of a bird,
  affixed to the skeleton, but is merely attached to the skin and
  muscles.

  Australia has no apes, monkeys or baboons, and no ruminant beasts. The
  comparatively few indigenous placental mammals, besides the dingo or
  wild dog--which, however, may have come from the islands north of this
  continent--are of the bat tribe and of the rodent or rat tribe. There
  are four species of large fruit-eating bats, called flying foxes,
  twenty of insect-eating bats, above twenty of land-rats, and five of
  water-rats. The sea produces three different seals, which often ascend
  rivers from the coast, and can live in lagoons of fresh water; many
  cetaceans, besides the "right whale" and sperm whale; and the dugong,
  found on the northern shores, which yields a valuable medicinal oil.

  The birds of Australia in their number and variety of species may be
  deemed some compensation for its poverty of mammals; yet it will not
  stand comparison in this respect with regions of Africa and South
  America in the same latitudes. The black swan was thought remarkable
  when discovered, as belying an old Latin proverb. There is also a
  white eagle. The vulture is wanting. Sixty species of parrots, some of
  them very handsome, are found in Australia. The emu corresponds with
  the African and Arabian ostrich, the rhea of South America, and the
  cassowary of the Moluccas and New Guinea. In New Zealand this group is
  represented by the apteryx, as it formerly was by the gigantic moa,
  the remains of which have been found likewise in Queensland. The
  graceful _Menura superba_, or lyre-bird, with its tail feathers spread
  in the shape of a lyre, is a very characteristic form. The
  mound-raising megapodes, the bower-building satin-birds, and several
  others, display peculiar habits. The honey-eaters present a great
  diversity of plumage. There are also many kinds of game birds,
  pigeons, ducks, geese, plovers and quails. The ornithology of New
  South Wales and Queensland is more varied and interesting than that of
  the other provinces.

  As for reptiles, Australia has a few tortoises, all of one family, and
  not of great size. The "leathery turtle," which is herbivorous, and
  yields abundance of oil, has been caught at sea off the Illawarra
  coast so large as 9 ft. in length. The saurians or lizards are
  numerous, chiefly on dry sandy or rocky ground in the tropical region.
  The great crocodile of Queensland has been known to attain a length of
  30 ft.; there is a smaller one about 6 ft. in length to be met with in
  the shallow lagoons of the interior of the Northern Territory. Lizards
  occur in great profusion and variety. The monitor, or fork-tongued
  lizard, which burrows in the earth, climbs and swims, is said to grow
  to a length of 8 to 9 ft. This species and many others do not extend
  to Tasmania. The monitor is popularly known as the goanna, a name
  derived from the iguana, an entirely different animal. There are about
  twenty kinds of night-lizards, and many which hibernate. One species
  can utter a cry when pained or alarmed, and the tall-standing frilled
  lizard can lift its forelegs, and squat or hop like a kangaroo. There
  is also the _Moloch horridus_ of South and Western Australia, covered
  with tubercles bearing large spines, which give it a very strange
  aspect. This and some other lizards have power to change their colour,
  not only from light to dark, but over some portions of their bodies,
  from yellow to grey or red. Frogs of many kinds are plentiful, the
  brilliant green frogs being especially conspicuous and noisy.
  Australia is rich in snakes, and has more than a hundred different
  kinds. Most of these are venomous, but all are not equally dreaded.
  Five rather common species are certainly deadly--the death adder, the
  brown, the black, the superb and the tiger snakes. During the colder
  months these reptiles remain in a torpid state. No certain cure has
  been or is likely to be discovered for their poison, but in less
  serious cases strychnine has been used with advantage. In tropical
  waters a sea snake is found, which, though very poisonous, rarely
  bites. Among the inoffensive species are counted the graceful green
  "tree snake," which pursues frogs, birds and lizards to the topmost
  branches of the forest; also several species of pythons, the commonest
  of which is known as the carpet snake. These great reptiles may attain
  a length of 10 ft.; they feed on small animals which they crush to
  death in their folds.

  The Australian seas are inhabited by many fishes of the same genera as
  exist in the southern parts of Asia and Africa. Of those peculiar to
  Australian waters may be mentioned the arripis, represented by what is
  called among the colonists a salmon trout. A very fine freshwater fish
  is the Murray cod, which sometimes weighs 100 lb.; and the golden
  perch, found in the same river, has rare beauty of colour. Among the
  sea fish, the schnapper is of great value as an article of food, and
  its weight comes up to 50 lb. This is the _Pagrus unicolor_, of the
  family of _Sparidae_, which includes also the bream. Its colours are
  beautiful, pink and red with a silvery gloss; but the male as it grows
  old takes on a singular deformity of the head, with a swelling in the
  shape of a monstrous human-like nose. These fish frequent rocky shoals
  off the eastern coast and are caught in numbers outside Port Jackson
  for the Sydney market. Two species of mackerel, differing somewhat
  from the European species, are also caught on the coasts. The
  so-called red garnet, a pretty fish, with hues of carmine and blue
  stripes on its head, is much esteemed for the table. The _Trigla
  polyommata_, or flying garnet, is a greater beauty, with its body of
  crimson and silver, and its large pectoral fins, spread like wings, of
  a rich green, bordered with purple, and relieved by a black and white
  spot. Whiting, mullet, gar-fish, rock cod and many others known by
  local names, are in the lists of edible fishes belonging to New South
  Wales and Victoria. Oysters abound on the eastern coast, and on the
  shelving banks of a vast extent of the northern coast the pearl oyster
  is the source of a considerable industry.

  Two existing fishes may be mentioned as ranking in interest with the
  _Myrmecobius_ (ant-eater) in the eyes of the naturalist. These are the
  _Ceratodus Forsteri_ and the Port Jackson shark. The "mud-fish" of
  Queensland (_Ceratodus Forsteri_) belongs to an ancient order of
  fishes--the Dipnoi, only a few species of which have survived from
  past geological periods. The Dipnoi show a distinct transition between
  fishes and amphibia. So far the mud-fish has been found only in the
  Mary and the Burnett rivers. Hardly of less scientific interest is the
  Port Jackson shark (_Heterodontus_). It is a harmless helmeted
  ground-shark, living on molluscs, and almost the sole survivor of a
  genus abundant in the Secondary rocks of Europe.

    Flora.

  The eastern parts of Australia are very much richer both in their
  botany and in their zoology than any of the other parts. This is due
  in part to the different physical conditions there prevailing and in
  part to the invasion of the north-eastern portion of the continent by
  a number of plants characteristically Melanesian. This element was
  introduced via Torres Strait, and spread down the Queensland coast to
  portions of the New South Wales littoral, and also round the Gulf of
  Carpentaria, but has never been able to obtain a hold in the more arid
  interior. It has so completely obliterated the original flora, that a
  Queensland coast jungle is almost an exact replication of what may be
  seen on the opposite shores of the straits, in New Guinea. This wealth
  of plant life is confined to the littoral and the coastal valleys, but
  the central valleys and the plateaux have, if not a varied flora, a
  considerable wealth of timber trees in every way superior to the flora
  inland in the same latitudes. In the interior there is little change
  in the general aspect of the vegetation, from the Australian Bight to
  the region of Carpentaria, where the exotic element begins. Behind the
  luxuriant jungles of the sub-tropical coast, once over the main range,
  we find the purely Australian flora with its apparent sameness and
  sombre dulness. Physical surroundings rather than latitude determine
  the character of the flora. The contour lines showing the heights
  above sea-level are the directions along which species spread to form
  zones. Putting aside the exotic vegetation of the north and east
  coast-line, the Australian bush gains its peculiar character from the
  prevalence of the so-called gum-trees (_Eucalyptus_) and the acacias,
  of which last there are 300 species, but the eucalypts above all are
  everywhere. Dwarfed eucalypts fringe the tree-limit on Mount
  Kosciusco, and the soakages in the parched interior are indicated by a
  line of the same trees, stunted and straggling. Over the vast
  continent from Wilson's Promontory to Cape York, north, south, east
  and west--where anything can grow--there will be found a gum-tree. The
  eucalypts are remarkable for the oil secreted in their leaves, and the
  large quantity of astringent resin of their bark. This resinous
  exudation (Kino) somewhat resembles gum, hence the name "gum" tree. It
  will not dissolve in water as gums do, but it is soluble in alcohol,
  as resin usually is. Many of the gum-trees throw off their bark, so
  that it hangs in long dry strips from the trunk and branches, a
  feature familiar in "bush" pictures. The bark, resin and "oils" of the
  eucalyptus are well known as commercial products. As early as 1866,
  tannic acid, gallic acid, wood spirit, acetic acid, essential oil and
  eucalyptol were produced from various species of eucalyptus, and
  researches made by Australian chemists, notably by Messrs. Baker and
  Smith of the Sydney Technical College, have brought to light many
  other valuable products likely to prove of commercial value. The genus
  _Eucalyptus_ numbers more than 150 species, and provides some of the
  most durable timbers known. The iron-bark of the eastern coast uplands
  is well known (_Eucalyptus sideroxylon_), and is so called from the
  hardness of the wood, the bark not being remarkable except for its
  rugged and blackened aspect. Samples of this timber have been studied
  after forty-three years' immersion in sea-water. Portions most liable
  to destruction, those parts between the tide marks, were found
  perfectly sound, and showed no signs of the ravages of marine
  organisms. Other valuable timber trees of the eastern portion of the
  continent are the blackbutt, tallow-wood, spotted gum, red gum,
  mahogany, and blue gum, eucalyptus; and the turpentine (_Syncarpia
  laurifolia_), which has proved to be more resistant to the attacks of
  teredo than any other timber and is largely used in wharf construction
  in infested waters. There are also several extremely valuable soft
  timbers, the principal being red cedar (_Cedrela Toona_), silky oak
  (_Grevillea robusta_), beech and a variety of teak, with several
  important species of pine. The red gum forests of the Murray valley
  and the pine forests bordering the Great Plains are important and
  valuable. In Western Australia there are extensive forests of
  hardwood, principally jarrah (_Eucalyptus marginata_), a very durable
  timber; 14,000 sq. m. of country are covered with this species. Jarrah
  timber is nearly impervious to the attacks of the teredo, and there is
  good evidence to show that, exposed to wear and weather, or placed
  under the soil, or used as submarine piles, the wood remained intact
  after nearly fifty years' trial. The following figures show the high
  density of Australian timber:--

      Australian       Specific
       timber.         gravity.

    Jarrah              1.12
    Grey iron-bark      1.18
    Red iron-bark       1.22
    Forest oak          1.21
    Tallow wood         1.23
    Mahogany            1.20
    Grey gum             .917
    Red gum              .995

      European         Specific
       timber.         gravity.
    Ash                  .753
    Beech                .690
    Chestnut             .535
    British oak          .99

  The resistance to breaking or rupture of Australian timber is very
  high; grey iron-bark with a specific gravity of 1.18 has a modulus of
  rupture of 17,900 lb. per sq. in. compared with 11,800 lb. for British
  oak with a specific gravity of .69 to .99. No Australian timber in the
  foregoing list has a less modulus than 13,100 lb. per sq. in.

  Various "scrubs" characterize the interior, differing very widely from
  the coastal scrubs. "Mallee" scrub occupies large tracts of South
  Australia and Victoria, covering probably an extent of 16,000 sq. m.
  The mallee is a species of eucalyptus growing 12 to 14 ft. high. The
  tree breaks into thin stems close to the ground, and these branch
  again and again, the leaves being developed umbrella-fashion on the
  outer branches. The mallee scrub appears like a forest of dried osier,
  growing so close that it is not always easy to ride through it. Hardly
  a leaf is visible to the height of one's head; but above, a crown of
  thick leather-like leaves shuts out the sunlight. The ground below is
  perfectly bare, and there is no water. Nothing could add to the
  sterility and the monotony of these mallee scrubs. "Mulga" scrub is a
  somewhat similar thicket, covering large areas. The tree in this
  instance is one of the acacias, a genus distributed through all parts
  of the continent. Some species have rather elegant blossoms, known to
  the settlers as "wattle." They serve admirably to break the sombre and
  monotonous aspect of the Australian vegetation. Two species of acacia
  are remarkable for the delicate and violet-like perfume of their
  wood--myall and yarran. The majority of the species of _Acacia_ are
  edible and serve as reserve fodder for sheep and cattle. In the
  alluvial portions of the interior salsolaceous plants--saltbush,
  bluebush, cottonbush--are invaluable to the pastoralist, and to their
  presence the pre-eminence of Australia as a wool-producing country is
  largely due.

  Grasses and herbage in great variety constitute the most valuable
  element of Australian flora from the commercial point of view. The
  herbage for the most part grows with marvellous rapidity after a
  spring or autumn shower and forms a natural shelter for the more
  stable growth of nutritious grasses.

  Under the system of grazing practised throughout Australia it is
  customary to allow sheep, cattle and horses to run at large all the
  year round within enormous enclosures and to depend entirely upon the
  natural growth of grass for their subsistence. Proteaceous plants,
  although not exclusively Australian, are exceedingly characteristic of
  Australian scenery, and are counted amongst the oldest flowering
  plants of the world. The order is easily distinguished by the hard,
  dry, woody texture of the leaves and the dehiscent fruits. They are
  found in New Zealand and also in New Caledonia, their greatest
  developments being on the south-west of the Australian continent.
  Proteaceae are found also in Tierra del Fuego and Chile. They are also
  abundant in South Africa, where the order forms the most conspicuous
  feature of vegetation. The range in species is very limited, no one
  being common to eastern and western Australia. The chief genera are
  banksia (_honeysuckle_), and hakea (_needle bush_).

  The Moreton Bay pine (_Araucaria Cunninghamii_) is reckoned amongst
  the giants of the forest. The genus is associated with one long
  extinct in Europe. Moreton Bay pine is chiefly known by the utility of
  its wood. Another species, _A. Bidwillii_, or the bunya-bunya,
  afforded food in its nut-like seeds to the aborigines. A most
  remarkable form of vegetation in the north-west is the gouty-stemmed
  tree (_Adansonia Gregorii_), one of the Malvaceae. It is related
  closely to the famous baobab of tropical Africa. The "grass-tree"
  (_Xanthorrhoea_), of the uplands and coast regions, is peculiarly
  Australian in its aspect. It is seen as a clump of wire-like leaves, a
  few feet in diameter, surrounding a stem, hardly thicker than a
  walking-stick, rising to a height of 10 or 12 ft. This terminates in a
  long spike thickly studded with white blossoms. The grass-tree gives
  as distinct a character to an Australian picture as the agave and
  cactus do to the Mexican landscape. With these might be associated the
  gigantic lily of Queensland (_Nymphaea gigantea_), the leaves of which
  float on water, and are quite 18 in. across. There is also a gigantic
  lily (_Doryanthes excelsa_) which grows to a height of 15 feet. The
  "flame tree" is a most conspicuous feature of an Illawarra landscape,
  the largest racemes of crimson red suggesting the name. The waratah or
  native tulip, the magnificent flowering head of which, with the
  kangaroo, is symbolic of the country, is one of the Proteaceae. The
  natives were accustomed to suck its tubular flowers for the honey they
  contained. The "nardoo" seed, on which the aborigines sometimes
  contrived to exist, is a creeping plant, growing plentifully in swamps
  and shallow pools, and belongs to the natural order of Marsileaceae.
  The spore-cases remain after the plant is dried up and withered. These
  are collected by the natives, and are known over most of the continent
  as nardoo.

  No speculation of hypothesis has been propounded to account
  satisfactorily for the origin of the Australian flora. As a step
  towards such hypothesis it has been noted that the Antarctic, the
  South African, and the Australian floras have many types in common.
  There is also to a limited extent a European element present. One
  thing is certain, that there is in Australia a flora that is a remnant
  of a vegetation once widely distributed. Heer has described such
  Australian genera as Banksia, Eucalyptus, _Grevillea_ and _Hakea_ from
  the Miocene of Switzerland. Another point agreed upon is that the
  Australian flora is one of vast antiquity. There are genera so far
  removed from every living genus that many connecting links must have
  become extinct. The region extending round the south-western extremity
  of the continent has a peculiarly characteristic assemblage of typical
  Australian forms, notably a great abundance of the Proteaceae. This
  flora, isolated by arid country from the rest of the continent, has
  evidently derived its plant life from an outside source, probably from
  lands no longer existing.

POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

_Population._[2]--The Australian people are mainly of British origin,
only 3¼% of the population of European descent being of non-British
race. It is certain that the aborigines (see the section on Aborigines
below) are very much less numerous than when the country was first
colonized, but their present numbers can be given for only a few of the
states. At the census of 1901, 48,248 aborigines were enumerated, of
whom 7434 were in New South Wales, 652 in Victoria, 27,123 in South
Australia, and 6212 in Western Australia. The assertion by the
Queensland authorities that there are 50,000 aborigines in that state is
a crude estimate, and may be far wide of the truth. In South Australia
and the Northern Territory a large number are outside the bounds of
settlement, and it is probable that they are as numerous there as in
Queensland. The census of Western Australia included only those
aborigines in the employment of the colonists; and as a large part of
this, the greatest of the Australian states, is as yet unexplored, it
may be presumed that the aborigines enumerated were very far short of
the whole number of persons of that race in the state. Taking all things
into consideration, the aboriginal population of the continent may be
set down at something like 180,000. Chinese, numbering about 30,000, are
chiefly found in New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria, and the Northern
Territory. Of Japanese there were 3500, of Hindu and Sinhalese 4600,
according to recent computation, but the policy of the Commonwealth is
adverse to further immigration of other than whites. South Sea Islanders
and other coloured races, numbering probably about 15,000, were in 1906
to be found principally in Queensland, but further immigration of
Pacific Islanders to Australia is now restricted, and the majority of
those in the country in 1906 were deported by the middle of 1907.

At the close of 1906 the population of Australia was approximately
4,120,000, exclusive of aborigines. The increase of population since
1871 was as follows: 1871, 1,668,377; 1881, 2,252,617; 1891, 3,183,237;
1901, 3,773,248. The expansion has been due mainly to the natural
increase; that is, by reason of excess of births over deaths.
Immigration to Australia has been very slight since 1891, owing
originally to the stoppage of progress consequent on the bank crisis of
1893, and, subsequently, to the disinclination of several of the state
governments towards immigration and their failure to provide for the
welfare of immigrants on their arrival. During 1906 a more rational view
of the value of immigration was adopted by the various state governments
and by the federal government, and immigration to Australia is now
systematically encouraged. Australia's gain of population by
immigration,--i.e. the excess of the inward over the outward movement
of a population--since the discovery of gold in 1851, arranged in ten
years periods, was

  1852-1861      520,713
  1862-1871      188,158
  1872-1881      223,326
  1882-1891      374,097
  1892-1901        2,377

During the five years following the last year of the foregoing table,
there was practically no increase in population by immigration.

The birth rate averages 26.28 per thousand of the population and the
death rate 12.28, showing a net increase of 14 per thousand by reason of
the excess of births over deaths. The marriage rate varies as in other
countries from year to year according to the degree of prosperity
prevailing. In the five years 1881-1888 the rate was 8.08 marriages
(16.1 persons) per thousand of the population, declining to 6.51 in
1891-1895; in recent years there has been a considerable improvement,
and the Australian marriage rate may be quoted as ranging between 6.75
and 7.25. The death rate of Australia is much below that of European
countries and is steadily declining. During the twenty years preceding
the census of 1901 there was a fall in the death rate of 3.4 per
thousand, of which, however, 1 per thousand is attributable to the
decline in the birth rate, the balance being attributable to improved
sanitary conditions.

_Territorial Divisions._--Australia is politically divided into five
states, which with the island of Tasmania form the Commonwealth of
Australia. The area of the various states is as follows:

                         Sq. m.
  New South Wales       310,700
  Victoria               87,884
  Queensland            668,497
  South Australia       903,690
  Western Australia     975,920
                      ---------
                      2,946,691
  Tasmania               26,215
                      =========
  Commonwealth        2,972,906

To the area of the Commonwealth shown in the table might be added that
of New Guinea, 90,000 sq. m.; this would bring the area of the territory
controlled by the Commonwealth to 3,062,906 sq. m. The distribution of
population at the close of 1906 (4,118,000) was New South Wales
1,530,000, Victoria 1,223,000, Queensland 534,000, South Australia
381,000, Western Australia 270,000, Tasmania 180,000. The rate of
increase since the previous census was 1.5% per annum, varying from 0.31
in Victoria to 2.06 in New South Wales and 6.9 in Western Australia.

Australia contains four cities whose population exceeds 100,000, and
fifteen with over 10,000. The principal cities and towns are Sydney
(pop. 530,000), Newcastle, Broken Hill, Parramatta, Goulburn, Maitland,
Bathurst, Orange, Lithgow, Tamworth, Grafton, Wagga and Albury, in New
South Wales; Melbourne (pop. 511,900), Ballarat, Bendigo, Geelong,
Eaglehawk, Warrnambool, Castlemaine, and Stawell in Victoria; Brisbane
(pop. 128,000), Rockhampton, Maryborough, Townsville, Gympie, Ipswich,
and Toowoomba in Queensland; Adelaide (pop. about 175,000), Port
Adelaide and Port Pirie in South Australia; Perth (pop. 56,000),
Fremantle, and Kalgoorlie in Western Australia; and Hobart (pop. 35,500)
and Launceston in Tasmania.

_Defence._--Up to the end of the 19th century, little was thought of any
locally-raised or locally-provided defensive forces, the mother-country
being relied upon. But the Transvaal War of 1899-1902, to which
Australia sent 6310 volunteers (principally mounted rifles), and the
gradual increase of military sentiment, brought the question more to the
front, and more and more attention was given to making Australian
defence a matter of local concern. Naval defence in any case remained
primarily a question for the Imperial navy, and by agreement (1903, for
ten years) between the British government and the governments of the
Commonwealth (contributing an annual subsidy of £200,000) and of New
Zealand (£40,000), an efficient fleet patrolled the Australasian waters,
Sydney, its headquarters, being ranked as a first-class naval station.
Under the agreement a royal naval reserve was maintained, three of the
Imperial vessels provided being utilized as drill ships for crews
recruited from the Australian states. At the end of 1908 the strength of
the naval forces under the Commonwealth defence department was:
permanent, 217, naval militia, 1016; the estimated expenditure for
1908-1909 being £63,531. In 1908-1909 a movement began for the
establishment by Australia of a local flotilla of torpedo-boat
destroyers, to be controlled by the Commonwealth in peace time, but
subject to the orders of the British admiralty in war time, though not
to be removed from the Australian coast without the sanction of the
Commonwealth; and by 1909 three such vessels had been ordered in England
preparatory to building others in Australia. The military establishment
at the beginning of 1909 was represented by a small permanent force of
about 1400, a militia strength of about 17,000, and some 6000
volunteers, besides 50,000 members of rifle clubs and 30,000 cadets; the
expenditure being (estimate, 1908-1909) £623,946. But a reorganization
of the military forces, on the basis of obligatory national training,
was already contemplated, though the first Bill introduced for this
purpose by Mr Deakin's government (Sept. 1908) was dropped, and in 1909
the subject was still under discussion.

_Religion._--There is no state church in Australia, nor is the teaching
of religion in any way subsidized by the state. The Church of England
claims as adherents 39% of the population, and the Roman Catholic Church
22%; next in numerical strength are the Wesleyans and other Methodists,
numbering 12%, the various branches of the Presbyterians 11%,
Congregationalists 2%, and Baptists 2%. These proportions varied very
little between 1881 and 1906, and may be taken as accurately
representing the present strength of the various Christian
denominations. Churches of all denominations are liberally supported
throughout the states, and the residents of every settlement, however
small, have their places of worship erected and maintained by their own
contributions.

_Instruction._--Education is very widely distributed, and in every state
it is compulsory for children of school ages to attend school. The
statutory ages differ in the various states; in New South Wales and
Western Australia it is from 6 to 13 years inclusive, in Victoria 6 to
12 years, in Queensland 6 to 11 years, and in South Australia 7 to 12
years inclusive. Religious instruction is not imparted by the state-paid
teachers in any state, though in certain states persons duly authorized
by the religious organizations are allowed to give religious instruction
to children of their own denomination where the parents' consent has
been obtained. According to the returns for 1905 there were 7292 state
schools, with 15,628 teachers and 648,927 pupils, and the average
attendance of scholars was 446,000. Besides state schools there were
2145 private schools, with 7825 teachers and 137,000 scholars, the
average number of scholars in attendance being 120,000. The census of
1901 showed that about 83% of the whole population and more than 91% of
the population over five years of age could read and write. There was,
therefore, a residue of 9% of illiterates, most of whom were not born in
Australia. The marriage registers furnish another test of education. In
1905 only ten persons in every thousand married were unable to sign
their names, thus proving that the number of illiterate adults of
Australian birth is very small.

Instruction at state schools is either free or at merely nominal cost,
and high schools, technical colleges and agricultural colleges are
maintained by appropriations from the general revenues of the states.
There are also numerous grammar schools and other private schools.
Universities have been established at Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and
Hobart, and are well equipped and numerously attended; they are in part
supported by grants from the public funds and in part by private
endowments and the fees paid by students. The number of students
attending lectures is about 2500 and the annual income a little over
£100,000. The cost of public instruction in Australia averages about
11s. 4d. per inhabitant, and the cost per scholar in average attendance
at state schools is £4:13:9.

_Pastoral and Agricultural Industries._--The continent is essentially a
pastoral one, and the products of the flocks and herds constitute the
chief element in the wealth of Australia. Practically the whole of the
territory between the 145° meridian and the Great Dividing Range, as
well as extensive tracts in the south and west, are a natural sheep
pasture with climatic conditions and indigenous vegetation pre-eminently
adapted for the growth of wool of the highest quality. Numerically the
flocks of Australia represent one-sixth of the world's sheep, and in
just over half a century (1851-1905) the exports of Australian wool
alone reached the value of £650,000,000. During the same period, owing
to the efforts of pastoralists to improve their flocks, there was a
gradual increase in the weight of wool produced per sheep from 3¼ lb. to
an average of over 7 lb. The cattle and horse-breeding industries are of
minor importance as compared with wool-growing, but nevertheless
represent a great source of wealth, with vast possibilities of expansion
in the over-sea trade. The perfection of refrigeration in over-sea
carriage, which has done so much to extend the markets for Australian
beef and mutton, has also furthered the expansion of dairying, there
being an annual output of over 160 million lb. of butter, valued at
£6,000,000; of this about 64 million lb., valued at £2,500,000, is
exported annually to British markets.

Next to the pastoral industry, agriculture is the principal source of
Australian wealth. At the close of 1905 the area devoted to tillage was
9,365,000 acres, the area utilized for the production of breadstuffs
being 6,270,000 acres or over two-thirds of the whole extent of
cultivation. At first wheat was cultivated solely in the coastal
country, but experience has shown that the staple cereal can be most
successfully grown over almost any portion of the arable lands within
the 20 to 40 in. rainfall areas. The value of Australian wheat and flour
exported in 1905 was £5,500,000.

Other important crops grown are--maize, 324,000 acres; oats, 493,000
acres; other grains, 160,000 acres; hay, 1,367,000 acres; potatoes,
119,000 acres; sugar-cane, 141,000 acres; vines, 65,000 acres; and other
crops, 422,000 acres. The chief wheat lands are in Victoria, South
Australia and New South Wales; the yield averages about 9 bushels to the
acre; this low average is due to the endeavour of settlers on new lands
to cultivate larger areas than their resources can effectively deal
with; the introduction of scientific farming should almost double the
yield. Maize and sugar-cane are grown in New South Wales and Queensland.
The vine is cultivated in all the states, but chiefly in South
Australia, Victoria and New South Wales. Australia produces abundant
quantities and nearly all varieties of fruits; but the kinds exported
are chiefly oranges, pineapples, bananas and apples. Tobacco thrives
well in New South Wales and Victoria, but kinds suitable for exportation
are not largely grown. Compared with the principal countries of the
world, Australia does not take a high position in regard to the gross
value of the produce of its tillage, the standard of cultivation being
for the most part low and without regard to maximum returns, but in
value per inhabitant it compares fairly well; indeed, some of the states
show averages which surpass those of many of the leading agricultural
countries. For 1905 the total value of agricultural produce estimated at
the place of production was £18,750,000 sterling, or about £4:13:4 per
inhabitant.

_Timber Industry._--Although the timbers of commercial value are
confined practically to the eastern and a portion of the western coastal
belt and a few inland tracts of Australia, they constitute an important
national asset. The early settlement of heavily timbered country was
characterized by wanton destruction of vast quantities of magnificent
timber; but this waste is a thing of the past, and under the pressure of
a demand for sound timber both for local use and for exportation, the
various governments are doing much to conserve the state forests. In
Western Australia, New South Wales, Tasmania and Queensland there are
many hundreds of well-equipped saw-mills affording employment to about
5000 men. The export of timber is in ordinary years valued at a million
sterling and the total production at £2,250,000.

_Fisheries._--Excellent fish of many varieties abound in the Australian
seas and in many of the rivers. In several of the states, fish have been
introduced successfully from other countries. Trout may now be taken in
many of the mountain streams. At one time whaling was an important
industry on the coasts of New South Wales and Tasmania, and afterwards
on the Western Australian coasts. The industry gravitated to New
Zealand, and finally died out, chiefly through the wasteful practice of
killing the calves to secure the capture of the mothers. Of late years
whaling has again attracted attention, and a small number of vessels
prosecute the industry during the season. The only source of maritime
wealth that is now being sufficiently exploited to be regarded as an
industry is the gathering of pearl-oysters from the beds off the
northern and north-western coasts of the continent. In Queensland waters
there are about 300 vessels, and on the Western Australian coast about
450 licensed craft engaged in the industry, the annual value of
pearl-shell and pearls raised being nearly half a million sterling.
Owing to the depletion of some of the more accessible banks, and to
difficulties in connexion with the employment of coloured crews, many of
the vessels have now gone farther afield. As the pearl-oyster is
remarkably prolific, it is considered by experts that within a few years
of their abandonment by fishing fleets the denuded banks will become as
abundantly stocked as ever.

  Gold.

_Mineral Production._--Australia is one of the great gold producers of
the world, and its yield in 1905 was about £16,000,000 sterling, or
one-fourth of the gold output of the world; and the total value of its
mineral production was approximately £25,000,000. Gold is found
throughout Australia, and the present prosperity of the states is
largely due to the discoveries of this metal, the development of other
industries being, in a country of varied resources, a natural sequence
to the acquisition of mineral treasure. From the date of its first
discovery, up to the close of 1905, gold to the value of £460,000,000
sterling has been obtained in Australia. Victoria, in a period of
fifty-four years, contributed about £273,000,000 to this total, and is
still a large producer, its annual yield being about 800,000 oz., 29,000
men being engaged in the search for the precious metal. Queensland's
annual output is between 750,000 and 800,000 oz.; the number of men
engaged in gold-mining is 10,000. In New South Wales the greatest
production was in 1852, soon after the first discovery of the precious
metal, when the output was valued at £2,660,946; the production in 1905
was about 270,000 oz., valued at £1,150,000. For many years Western
Australia was considered to be destitute of mineral deposits of any
value, but it is now known that a rich belt of mineral country extends
from north to south. The first important discovery was made in 1882,
when gold was found in the Kimberley district; but it was not until a
few years later that this rich and extensive area was developed. In 1887
gold was found in Yilgarn, about 200 m. east of Perth. This was the
first of the many rich discoveries in the same district which have made
Western Australia the chief gold-producer of the Australian group. In
1907 there were eighteen goldfields in the state, and it was estimated
that over 30,000 miners were actively engaged in the search for gold. In
1905 the production amounted to 1,983,000 oz., valued at £8,300,000.
Tasmania is a gold producer to the extent of about 70,000 or 80,000 oz.
a year, valued at £300,000; South Australia produces about 30,000 oz.

Gold is obtained chiefly from quartz reefs, but there are still some
important alluvial deposits being worked. The greatest development of
quartz reefing is found in Victoria, some of the mines being of great
depth. There are eight mines in the Bendigo district over 3000 ft. deep,
and fourteen over 2500 ft. deep. In the Victoria mine a depth of 3750
ft. has been reached, and in Lazarus mine 3424 ft. In the Ballarat
district a depth of 2520 ft. has been reached in the South Star mine. In
Queensland there is one mine 3156 ft. deep, and several others exceed
2000 ft. in depth. A considerable number of men are engaged in the
various states on alluvial fields, in hydraulic sluicing, and dredging
is now adopted for the winning of gold in river deposits. So far this
form of winning is chiefly carried on in New South Wales, where there
are about fifty gold-dredging plants in successful operation. Over
70,000 men are employed in the gold-mining industry, more than
two-thirds of them being engaged in quartz mining.

    Silver.

  Silver has been discovered in all the states, either alone or in the
  form of sulphides, antimonial and arsenical ores, chloride, bromide,
  iodide and chloro-bromide of silver, and argentiferous lead ores, the
  largest deposits of the metal being found in the last-mentioned form.
  The leading silver mines are in New South Wales, the returns from the
  other states being comparatively insignificant. The fields of New
  South Wales have proved to be of immense value, the yield of silver
  and lead during 1905 being £2,500,000, and the total output to the end
  of the year named over £40,000,000. The Broken Hill field, which was
  discovered in 1883, extends over 2500 sq. m. of country, and has
  developed into one of the principal mining centres of the world. It is
  situated beyond the river Darling, and close to the boundary between
  New South Wales and South Australia. The lodes occur in Silurian
  metamorphic micaceous schists, intruded by granite, porphyry and
  diorite, and traversed by numerous quartz reefs, some of which are
  gold-bearing. The Broken Hill lode is the largest yet discovered. It
  varies in width from 10 ft. to 200 ft., and may be traced for several
  miles. Although indications of silver abound in all the other states,
  no fields of great importance have yet been discovered. Up to the end
  of 1904 Australia had produced silver to the value of £45,000,000. At
  Broken Hill mines about 11,000 miners are employed.

    Copper.

  Copper is known to exist in all the states, and has been mined
  extensively in South Australia, New South Wales, Queensland and
  Tasmania. The low quotations which ruled for a number of years had a
  depressing effect upon the industry, and many mines once profitably
  worked were temporarily closed, but in 1906 there was a general
  revival. The discovery of copper had a marked effect on the fortunes
  of South Australia at a time when the young colony was surrounded by
  difficulties. The first important mine, the Kapunda, was opened up in
  1842. It is estimated that at one time 2000 tons were produced
  annually, but the mine was closed in 1879. In 1845 the celebrated
  Burra Burra mine was discovered. This mine proved to be very rich, and
  paid £800,000 in dividends to the original owners. For a number of
  years, however, the mine has been suffered to remain untouched, as the
  deposits originally worked were found to be depicted. For many years
  the average output was from 10,000 to 13,000 tons of ore, yielding
  from 22 to 23% of copper. For the period of thirty years during which
  the mine was worked the production of ore amounted to 234,648 tons,
  equal to 51,622 tons of copper, valued at £4,749,924. The Wallaroo and
  Moonta mines, discovered in 1860 and 1861, proved to be even more
  valuable than the Burra Burra, the Moonta mines employing at one time
  upwards of 1600 hands. The dividends paid by these mines amounted to
  about £1,750,000 sterling. The satisfactory price obtained during
  recent years has enabled renewed attention to be paid to copper mining
  in South Australia, and the production of the metal in 1905 was valued
  at £470,324. The principal deposits of copper in New South Wales are
  found in the central part of the state between the Macquarie, Darling
  and Bogan rivers. Deposits have also been found in the New England and
  southern districts, as well as at Broken Hill, showing that the
  mineral is widely distributed throughout the state. The more important
  mines are those of Cobar, where the Great Cobar mine produces annually
  nearly 4000 tons of refined copper. In northern Queensland copper is
  found throughout the Cloncurry district, in the upper basin of the
  Star river, and the Herberton district. The returns from the copper
  fields in the state are at present a little over half a million
  sterling per annum, and would be still greater if it were not for the
  lack of suitable fuel for smelting purposes, which renders the
  economical treatment of the ore difficult; the development of the
  mines is also retarded by the want of easy and cheaper communication
  with the coast. In Western Australia copper deposits have been worked
  for some years. Very rich lodes of the metal have been found in the
  Northampton, Murchison and Champion Bay districts, and also in the
  country to the south of these districts on the Irwin river. Tasmania
  is now the largest copper-producing state of the Commonwealth; in 1905
  the output was over £672,010 and in earlier years even larger. The
  chief mines belong to the Mount Lyell Mining & Railway Co., and are
  situated on the west side of the island with an outlet by rail to
  Strahan on the west coast. The total value of copper produced in
  Australia up to the end of 1905 was £42,500,000 sterling, £24,500,000
  having been obtained in South Australia, £7,500,000 in New South
  Wales, £6,400,000 in Tasmania and over £3,500,000 in Queensland.

    Tin.

  Tin was known to exist in Australia from the first years of
  colonization. The wealth of Queensland and the Northern Territory in
  this mineral, according to the reports of Dr Jack, late Government
  geologist of the former state, and the late Rev. J.E. Tenison-Woods,
  appears to be very great. The most important tin-mines in Queensland
  are in the Herberton district, south-west of Cairns; at Cooktown, on
  the Annan and Bloomfield rivers; and at Stanthorpe, on the border of
  New South Wales. Herberton and Stanthorpe have produced more than
  three-fourths of the total production of the state. Towards the close
  of the 19th century the production greatly decreased in consequence of
  the low price of the metal, but in 1899 a stimulus was given to the
  industry, and since then the production has increased very
  considerably, the output for 1905 being valued at £989,627. In New
  South Wales lode tin occurs principally in the granite and stream tin
  under the basaltic country in the extreme north of the state, at
  Tenterfield, Emmaville, Tingha, and in other districts of New England.
  The metal has also been discovered in the Barrier ranges, and many
  other places. The value of the output in 1905 was £226,110. The yield
  of tin in Victoria is very small, and until lately no fields of
  importance have been discovered; but towards the latter end of 1899
  extensive deposits were reported to exist in the Gippsland
  district--at Omeo and Tarwin. In South Australia tin-mining is
  unimportant. In Western Australia the production from the tin-fields
  at Greenbushes and elsewhere was valued at £87,000. Tasmania during
  the last few years has attained the foremost position in the
  production of tin, the annual output now being about £363,000. The
  total value of tin produced in Australia is nearly a million sterling
  per annum, and the total production to the end of 1905 was
  £22,500,000, of which Tasmania produced about 40%, New South Wales
  one-third, Queensland a little more than a fourth.

    Iron.

  Iron is distributed throughput Australia, but for want of capital for
  developing the fields this industry has not progressed. In New South
  Wales there are, together with coal and limestone in unlimited supply,
  important deposits of rich iron ores suitable for smelting purposes;
  and for the manufacture of steel of certain descriptions abundance of
  manganese, chrome and tungsten ores are available. The most extensive
  fields are in the Mittagong, Wallerawang and Rylstone districts, which
  are roughly estimated to contain in the aggregate 12,944,000 tons of
  ore, containing 5,853,000 tons of metallic iron. Extensive deposits,
  which are being developed successfully, occur in Tasmania, it being
  estimated that there are, within easy shipping facilities, 17,000,000
  tons of ore. Magnetite, or magnetic iron, the richest of all iron
  ores, is found in abundance near Wallerawang in New South Wales. The
  proximity of coal-beds now being worked should accelerate the
  development of the iron deposits, which, on an average, contain 41% of
  metal. Magnetite occurs in great abundance in Western Australia,
  together with haematite, which would be of enormous value if cheap
  labour were available. Goethite, limonite and haematite are found in
  New South Wales, at the junction of the Hawkesbury sandstone formation
  and the Wianamatta shale, near Nattai, and are enhanced in their value
  by their proximity to coal-beds. Near Lithgow extensive deposits of
  limonite, or clay-band ore, are interbedded with coal. Some samples of
  ore, coal and limestone, obtained in the Mittagong district, with
  pig-iron and castings manufactured therefrom, were exhibited at the
  Mining Exhibition in London and obtained a first award.

    Other Minerals.

  Antimony is widely diffused throughout Australia, and is sometimes
  found associated with gold. In New South Wales the principal centre of
  this industry is Hillgrove, near Armidale, where the Eleanora Mine,
  one of the richest in the state, is situated. The ore is also worked
  for gold. In Victoria the production of antimony gave employment in
  1890 to 238 miners, but owing to the low price of the metal,
  production has almost ceased. In Queensland the fields were all
  showing development in 1891, when the output exhibited a very large
  increase compared with that of former years; but, as in the case of
  Victoria, the production of the metal seems to have ceased. Good lodes
  of stibnite (sulphide of antimony) have been found near Roebourne in
  Western Australia, but no attempt has yet been made to work them.

  Bismuth is known to exist in all the Australian states, but up to the
  present time it has been mined for only in three states, viz. New
  South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania. It is usually
  found in association with tin and other minerals. The principal mine
  in New South Wales is situated at Kingsgate, in the New England
  district, where the mineral is generally associated with molybdenum
  and gold.

  Manganese probably exists in all the states, deposits having been
  found in New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia,
  the richest specimens being found in New South Wales. Little, however,
  has been done to utilize the deposits, the demands of the colonial
  markets being extremely limited. The ore generally occurs in the form
  of oxides, manganite and pyrolusite, and contains a high percentage of
  sesquioxide of manganese.

  Platinum and the allied compound metal iridosmine have been found in
  New South Wales, but so far in inconsiderable quantities. Iridosmine
  occurs commonly with gold or tin in alluvial drifts.

  The rare element tellurium has been discovered in New South Wales at
  Bingara and other parts of the northern districts, as well as at
  Tarana, on the western line, though at present in such minute
  quantities as would not repay the cost of working. At many of the
  mines at Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, large quantities of ores of
  telluride of gold have been found in the lode formations.

  Lead is found in all the Australian states, but is worked only when
  associated with silver. In Western Australia the lead occurs in the
  form of sulphides and carbonates of great richness, but the quantity
  of silver mixed with it is very small. The lodes are most frequently
  of great size, containing huge masses of galena, and so little gangue
  that the ore can very easily be dressed to 83 or 84%. The association
  of this metal with silver in the Broken Hill mines of New South Wales
  adds very greatly to the value of the product.

  Mercury is found in New South Wales and Queensland. In New South
  Wales, in the form of cinnabar, it has been discovered on the
  Cudgegong river, near Rylstone, and it also occurs at Bingara,
  Solferino, Yulgilbar and Cooma. In the last-named place the assays of
  ore yielded 22% of mercury.

  Titanium, in the minerals known as octahedrite and brookite, is found
  in alluvial deposits in New South Wales, in conjunction with diamonds.

  Wolfram (tungstate of iron and manganese) occurs in some of the
  states, notably in New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and Queensland.
  Scheelite, another mineral of tungsten, is also found in Queensland.
  Molybdenum, in the form of molybdenite (sulphide of molybdenum), is
  found in Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria, associated in the
  parent state with tin and bismuth in quartz reefs.

  Zinc ores, in the several varieties of carbonates, silicates, oxide,
  sulphide and sulphate of zinc, have been found in several of the
  Australian states but have attracted little attention except in New
  South Wales, where special efforts are being made successfully to
  produce a high-grade zinc concentrate from the sulphide ores. Several
  companies are devoting all their energies to zinc extraction, and the
  output is now equal to about 5% of the world's production.

  Nickel, so abundant in the island of New Caledonia, has up to the
  present been found in none of the Australian states except Queensland
  and Tasmania. Few attempts, however, have been made to prospect
  systematically for this valuable mineral.

  Cobalt occurs in New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia, and
  efforts have been made in the former state to treat the ore, the metal
  having a high commercial value; but the market is small, and no
  attempt has been made up to 1907 to produce it on any large scale. The
  manganese ores of the Bathurst district of New South Wales often
  contain a small percentage of cobalt--sufficient, indeed, to warrant
  further attempts to work them. In New South Wales chromium is found in
  the northern portion of the state, in the Clarence and Tamworth
  districts and also near Gundagai. It is usually associated with
  serpentine. In the Gundagai district the industry was rapidly becoming
  a valuable one, but the low price of chrome has greatly restricted the
  output. Chromium has been discovered in Tasmania also.

  Arsenic, in its well-known and beautiful forms, orpiment and realgar,
  is found in New South Wales and Victoria. It usually occurs in
  association with other minerals in veins.

    Fuel.

  The Australian states have been bountifully supplied with mineral
  fuel. Five distinct varieties of black coal, of well-characterized
  types, may be distinguished, and these, with the two extremes of brown
  coal or lignite and anthracite, form a perfectly continuous series.
  Brown coal, or lignite, occurs principally in Victoria. Attempts have
  frequently been made to use the mineral for ordinary fuel purposes,
  but its inferior quality has prevented its general use. Black coal
  forms one of the principal resources of New South Wales; and in the
  other states the deposits of this valuable mineral are being rapidly
  developed. Coal of a very fair description was discovered in the basin
  of the Irwin river, in Western Australia, as far back as the year
  1846. It has been ascertained from recent explorations that the area
  of carboniferous formation in that state extends from the Irwin
  northwards to the Gascoyne river, about 300 m., and probably all the
  way to the Kimberley district. The most important discovery of coal in
  the state, so far, is that made in the bed of the Collie river, near
  Bunbury, to the south of Perth. The coal has been treated and found to
  be of good quality, and there are grounds for supposing that there are
  250,000,000 tons in the field. Dr Jack, late government geologist of
  Queensland, considers the extent of the coal-fields of that state to
  be practically unlimited, and is of opinion that the carboniferous
  formations extend to a considerable distance under the Great Western
  Plains. It is roughly estimated that the Coal Measures at present
  practically explored extend over an area of about 24,000 sq. m.
  Coal-mining is an established industry in Queensland, and is
  progressing satisfactorily. The mines, however, are situated too far
  from the coast to permit of serious competition with Newcastle in an
  export trade, and the output is practically restricted to supplying
  local requirements. The coal-fields of New South Wales are situated in
  three distinct regions--the northern, southern and western districts.
  The first of these comprises chiefly the mines of the Hunter river
  districts; the second includes the Illawarra district, and, generally,
  the coastal regions to the south of Sydney, together with Berrima, on
  the tableland; and the third consists of the mountainous regions on
  the Great Western railway and extends as far as Dubbo. The total area
  of the Carboniferous strata of New South Wales is estimated at 23,950
  sq. m. The seams vary in thickness. One of the richest has been found
  at Greta in the Hunter river district; it contains an average
  thickness of 41 ft. of clean coal, and the quantity underlying each
  acre of ground has been computed to be 63,700 tons. The coal mines of
  New South Wales give employment to 14,000 persons, and the annual
  production is over 6,600,000 tons. Black coal has been discovered in
  Victoria, and about 250,000 tons are now being raised. The principal
  collieries in the state are the Outtrim Howitt, the Coal Creek
  Proprietary and the Jumbunna. In South Australia, at Leigh's Creek,
  north of Port Augusta, coal-beds have been discovered. The quantity of
  coal extracted annually in Australia had in 1906 reached 7,497,000
  tons.

  Kerosene shale (torbanite) is found in several parts of New South
  Wales. It is a species of cannel coal, somewhat similar to the Boghead
  mineral of Scotland, but yielding a much larger percentage of volatile
  hydro-carbon than the Scottish mineral. The richest quality yields
  about 100 to 130 gallons of crude oil per ton, or 17,000 to 18,000
  cub. ft. of gas, with an illuminating power of 35 to 40 sperm candles,
  when gas only is extracted from the shale.

  Large deposits of alum occur close to the village of Bulladelah, 30 m.
  from Port Stephens, New South Wales. It is said to yield well, and a
  quantity of the manufactured alum is sent to Sydney for local
  consumption. Marble is found in many parts of New South Wales and
  South Australia. Kaolin, fire-clays and brick-clays are common to all
  the states. Except in the vicinity of cities and townships, however,
  little use has been made of the abundant deposits of clay. Kaolin, or
  porcelain clay, although capable of application to commercial
  purposes, has not as yet been utilized to any extent, although found
  in several places in New South Wales and in Western Australia.

  Asbestos has been found in New South Wales in the Gundagai Bathurst
  and Broken Hill districts--in the last-mentioned district in
  considerable quantities. Several specimens of very fair quality have
  also been met with in Western Australia.

    Gems.

  Many descriptions of gems and gem stones have been discovered in
  various parts of the Australian states, but systematic search has been
  made principally for the diamond and the noble opal. Diamonds are
  found in all the states; but only in New South Wales have any attempts
  been made to work the diamond drifts. The best of the New South Wales
  diamonds are harder and much whiter than the South African diamonds,
  and are classified as on a par with the best Brazilian gems, but no
  large specimens have yet been found. The finest opal known is obtained
  in the Upper Cretaceous formation at White Cliffs, near Wilcannia, New
  South Wales, and at these mines about 700 men find constant
  employment. Other precious stones, including the sapphire, emerald,
  oriental emerald, ruby, opal, amethyst, garnet, chrysolite, topaz,
  cairngorm, onyx, zircon, &c., have been found in the gold and tin
  bearing drifts and river gravels in numerous localities throughout the
  states. The sapphire is found in all the states, principally in the
  neighbourhood of Beechworth, Victoria. The oriental topaz has been
  found in New South Wales. Oriental amethysts also have been found in
  that state, and the ruby has been found in Queensland, as well as in
  New South Wales. Turquoises have been found near Wangaratta, in
  Victoria, and mining operations are being carried on in that state.
  Chrysoberyls have been found in New South Wales; spinel rubies in New
  South Wales and Victoria; and white topaz in all the states.
  Chalcedony, carnelian, onyx and cat's eyes are found in New South
  Wales; and it is probable that they are also to be met with in the
  other states, particularly in Queensland. Zircon, tourmaline, garnet
  and other precious stones of little commercial value are found
  throughout Australia.

_Commerce._--The number of vessels engaged in the over-sea trade of
Australia in 1905 was 2112, viz. 1050 steamers, with a tonnage of
2,629,000, and 1062 sailers, tonnage 1,090,000; the total of both
classes was 3,719,000 tons. The nationality of the tonnage was, British
2,771,000, including Australian 288,000, and foreign 948,000. The
destination of the shipping was, to British ports 2,360,000 tons, and to
foreign ports 1,350,000 tons. The value of the external trade was
£95,188,000, viz. £38,347,000 imports, and £56,841,000 exports. The
imports represent £9:11:6 per inhabitant and the exports £14:4:2, with a
total trade of £23:15:8. The import trade is divided between the United
Kingdom and possessions and foreign countries as follows:--United
Kingdom £23,074,000, British possessions £5,384,000, and foreign states
£9,889,000, while the destination of the exports is, United Kingdom
£26,703,000, British possessions £12,519,000, and foreign countries
£17,619,000. The United Kingdom in 1905 sent 60% of the imports taken by
Australia, compared with 26% from foreign countries, and 14% from
British possessions; of Australian imports the United Kingdom takes 47%,
foreign countries 31% and British possessions 22%. In normal years (that
is to say, when there is no large movement of capital) the exports of
Australia exceed the imports by some £15,300,000. This sum represents
the interest payable on government loans placed outside Australia,
mainly in England, and the income from British and other capital
invested in the country; the former may be estimated at £7,300,000 and
the latter £8,000,000 per annum. The principal items of export are wool,
skins, tallow, frozen mutton, chilled beef, preserved meats, butter and
other articles of pastoral produce, timber, wheat, flour and fruits,
gold, silver, lead, copper, tin and other metals. In 1905 the value of
the wool export regained the £20,000,000 level, and with the rapid
recovery of the numerical strength of the flocks, great improvements in
the quality and weight of fleeces, this item is likely to show permanent
advancement. The exports of breadstuffs--chiefly to the United
Kingdom--exceed six millions per annum, butter two and a half millions,
and minerals of all kinds, except gold, six millions. Gold is exported
in large quantities from Australia. The total gold production of the
country is from £14,500,000 to £16,000,000, and as not more than
three-quarters of a million are required to strengthen existing local
stocks, the balance is usually available for export, and the average
export of the precious metal during the ten years, 1896-1905, was
£12,500,000 per annum. The chief articles of import are apparel and
textiles, machinery and hardware, stimulants, narcotics, explosives,
bags and sacks, books and paper, oils and tea.

Lines of steamers connect Australia with London and other British ports,
with Germany, Belgium, France, Italy, Japan, China, India, San
Francisco, Vancouver, New York and Montevideo, several important lines
being subsidized by the countries to which they belong, notably Germany,
France and Japan.

_Railways._--Almost the whole of the railway lines in Australia are the
property of the state governments, and have been constructed and
equipped wholly by borrowed capital. There were on the 30th of June
1905, 15,000 m. open for traffic, upon which nearly £135,000,000 had
been expended.

  The railways are of different gauges, the standard narrow gauge of 4
  ft. 8½ in. prevailing only in New South Wales; in Victoria the gauge
  is 5 ft. 3 in., in South Australia 5 ft. 3 in. and 3 ft. 6 in., and in
  the other states 3 ft. 6 in. Taking the year 1905, the gross earnings
  amounted to £11,892,262; the working expenses, exclusive of interest,
  £7,443,546; and the net earnings £4,448,716; the latter figure
  represents 3.31% upon the capital expended upon construction and
  equipment; in the subsequent year still better results were obtained.
  In several of the states, New South Wales and South Australia proper,
  the railways yield more than the interest paid by the government on
  the money borrowed for their construction. The earnings per train-mile
  vary greatly; but for all the lines the average is 7s. 1d., and the
  working expenses about 4s. 5d., making the net earnings 2s. 8d. per
  train-mile. The ratio of receipts from coaching traffic to total
  receipts is about 41%, which is somewhat less than in the United
  Kingdom; but the proportion varies greatly amongst the states
  themselves, the more densely populated states approaching most nearly
  to the British standard. The tonnage of goods carried amounts to about
  16,000,000 tons, or 4 tons per inhabitant, which must be considered
  fairly large, especially as no great proportion of the tonnage
  consists of minerals on which there is usually a low freightage.
  Excluding coal lines and other lines not open to general traffic, the
  length of railways in private hands is only 382 m. or about 2½% of the
  total mileage open. Of this length, 277 m. are in Western Australia.
  The divergence of policy of that state from that pursued by the other
  states was caused by the inability of the government to construct
  lines, when the extension of the railway system was urgently needed in
  the interests of settlement. Private enterprise was, therefore,
  encouraged by liberal grants of land to undertake the work of
  construction; but the changed conditions of the state have now altered
  the state policy, and the government have already acquired one of the
  two trunk lines constructed by private enterprise, and it is not
  likely that any further concessions in regard to railway construction
  will be granted to private persons.

  _Posts and Telegraphs._--The postal and telegraphic facilities offered
  by the various states are very considerable. There are some 6686
  post-offices throughout the Commonwealth, or about one office to every
  600 persons. The letters carried amount to about 80 per head, the
  newspapers to 32 per head and the packets to 15 per head. The length
  of telegraph lines in use is 46,300 m., and the length of wire nearly
  three times that distance. In 1905 there were about 11,000,000
  telegraphic messages sent, which gives an average of 2.7 messages per
  inhabitant. The postal services and the telegraphs are administered by
  the federal government.

  _Banking._--Depositors in savings banks represent about twenty-nine in
  every hundred persons, and in 1906 the sum deposited amounted to
  £37,205,000 in the names of 1,152,000 persons. In ordinary banks the
  deposits amounted to £106,625,000, so that the total deposits stood at
  £143,830,000, equivalent to the very large sum of £34, 18s. per
  inhabitant. The coin and bullion held by the banks varies between 20
  and 24 millions sterling and the note circulation is almost stationary
  at about 3¼ millions.

  _Public Finance._--Australian public finance requires to be treated
  under the separate headings of Commonwealth and states finance. Under
  the Constitution Act the Commonwealth is given the control of the
  postal and telegraph departments, public defence and several other
  services, as well as the power of levying customs and excise duties;
  its powers of taxation are unrestricted, but so far no taxes have been
  imposed other than those just mentioned. The Commonwealth is empowered
  to retain one-fourth of the net revenue from customs and excise, the
  balance must be handed back to the states. This arrangement was to
  last until 1910. Including the total receipts derived from the
  customs, the Commonwealth revenue, during the year 1906, was made up
  as follows:--

    Customs and excise        £8,999,485
    Posts, telegraphs, &c.     2,824,182
    Other revenue                 55,676
                             -----------
                             £11,879,343

  The return made to the states was £7,385,731, so that the actual
  revenue disposed of by the Commonwealth was less by that amount, or
  £4,493,612. The expenditure was distributed as follows:--

    Customs collection          £261,864
    Posts, telegraphs, &c.     2,774,804
    Defence                      949,286
    Other expenditure            508,887
                               ---------
                   Total      £4,494,841

  The states have the same powers of taxation as the Commonwealth except
  in regard to customs and excise, over which the Commonwealth has
  exclusive power, but the states are the owners of the crown lands, and
  the revenues derived from this source form an important part of their
  income. The states have a total revenue, from sources apart from the
  Commonwealth, of £23,820,439, and if to this be added the return of
  customs duties made by the federal government, the total revenue is
  £31,206,170. Although the financial operations of the Commonwealth and
  the states are quite distinct, a statement of the total revenue of the
  Australian Commonwealth and states is not without interest as showing
  the weight of taxation and the different sources from which revenue is
  obtained. For 1906 the respective revenues were:--

    Commonwealth                          £11,879,343
    States                                 23,820,439
                                          -----------
                                          £35,699,782
                                          ===========
    Direct taxation                        £3,200,000
    Indirect taxation; customs and excise   8,999,485
    Land revenue                            3,500,000
    Post-office and telegraphs              2,824,182
    Railways, &c.                          13,650,000
    Other service                           3,526,115

  The revenue from direct taxation is equal to 15s. 10d. per inhabitant,
  from indirect taxation £2:4:6, and the total revenue from all sources
  £35,699,782, equal to £8:16:2 per inhabitant. The federal government
  has no public debt, but each of the six states has contracted debts
  which aggregate £237,000,000, equal to about £58, 8s. per inhabitant.
  The bulk of this indebtedness has been contracted for the purpose of
  constructing railways, tramways, water-supplies, and other
  revenue-producing works and services, and it is estimated that only 8%
  of the total indebtedness can be set down for unproductive services.

  Information regarding Australian state finance will be found under the
  heading of each state.     (T. A. C.)

ABORIGINES

The origin of the natives of Australia presents a difficult problem. The
chief difficulty in deciding their ethnical relations is their
remarkable physical difference from the neighbouring peoples. And if one
turns from physical criteria to their manners and customs it is only to
find fresh evidence of their isolation. While their neighbours, the
Malays, Papuans and Polynesians, all cultivate the soil, and build
substantial huts and houses, the Australian natives do neither. Pottery,
common to Malays and Papuans, the bows and arrows of the latter, and the
elaborate canoes of all three races, are unknown to the Australians.
They then must be considered as representing an extremely primitive type
of mankind, and it is necessary to look far afield for their prehistoric
home.

  Origin.

Wherever they came from, there is abundant evidence that their first
occupation of the Australian continent must have been at a time so
remote as to permit of no traditions. No record, no folk tales, as in
the case of the Maoris of New Zealand, of their migration, are preserved
by the Australians. True, there are legends and tales of tribal
migrations and early tribal history, but nothing, as A.W. Howitt points
out, which can be twisted into referring even indirectly to their first
arrival. It is almost incredible there should be none, if the date of
their arrival is to be reckoned as only dating back some centuries.
Again, while they differ physically from neighbouring races, while there
is practically nothing in common between them and the Malays, the
Polynesians, or the Papuan Melanesians, they agree in type so closely
among themselves that they must be regarded as forming one race. Yet it
is noteworthy that the languages of their several tribes are different.
The occurrence of a large number of common roots proves them to be
derived from one source, but the great variety of dialects--sometimes
unintelligible between tribes separated by only a few miles--cannot be
explained except by supposing a vast period to have elapsed since their
first settlement. There is evidence in the languages, too, which
supports the physical separation from their New Zealand neighbours and,
therefore, from the Polynesian family of races. The numerals in use were
limited. In some tribes there were only three in use, in most four. For
the number "five" a word meaning "many" was employed. This linguistic
poverty proves that the Australian tongue has no affinity to the
Polynesian group of languages, where denary enumeration prevails: the
nearest Polynesians, the Maoris, counting in thousands. Further evidence
of the antiquity of Australian man is to be found in the strict
observance of tribal boundaries, which would seem to show that the
tribes must have been settled a long time in one place.

A further difficulty is created by a consideration of the Tasmanian
people, extinct since 1876. For the Tasmanians in many ways closely
approximated to the Papuan type. They had coarse, short, woolly hair and
Papuan features. They clearly had no racial affinities with the
Australians. They did not possess the boomerang or woomerah, and they
had no boats. When they were discovered, a mere raft of reeds in which
they could scarcely venture a mile from shore was their only means of
navigation. Yet while the Tasmanians are so distinctly separated in
physique and customs from the Australians, the fauna and flora of
Tasmania and Australia prove that at one time the two formed one
continent, and it would take an enormous time for the formation of Bass
Strait. How did the Tasmanians with their Papuan affinities get so far
south on a continent inhabited by a race so differing from Papuans? Did
they get to Tasmania before or after its separation from the main
continent? If before, why were they only found in the south? It would
have been reasonable to expect to find them sporadically all over
Australia. If after, how did they get there at all? For it is impossible
to accept the theory of one writer that they sailed or rowed round the
continent--a journey requiring enormous maritime skill, which, according
to the theory, they must have promptly lost.

Four points are clear: (1) the Australians represent a distinct race;
(2) they have no kinsfolk among the neighbouring races; (3) they have
occupied the continent for a very long period; (4) it would seem that
the Tasmanians must represent a still earlier occupation of Australia,
perhaps before the Bass Strait existed.

Several theories have been propounded by ethnologists. An attempt has
been made to show that the Australians have close affinities with the
African negro peoples, and certain resemblances in language and in
customs have been relied on. Sorcery, the scars raised on the body, the
knocking out of teeth, circumcision and rules as to marriage have been
quoted; but many such customs are found among savage peoples far distant
from each other and entirely unrelated. The alleged language
similarities have broken down on close examination. A.R. Wallace is of
the opinion that the Australians "are really of Caucasian type and are
more nearly allied to ourselves than to the civilized Japanese or the
brave and intelligent Zulus." He finds near kinsmen for them in the
Ainus of Japan, the Khmers and Chams of Cambodia and among some of the
Micronesian islanders who, in spite of much crossing, still exhibit
marked Caucasic types. He regards the Australians as representing the
lowest and most primitive examples of this primitive Caucasic type, and
he urges that they must have arrived in Australia at a time when their
ancestors had no pottery, knew no agriculture, domesticated no animals,
had no houses and used no bows and arrows. This theory has been
supported by the investigations of Dr Klaatsch, of the university of
Heidelberg, who would, however, date Australian ancestry still farther
back, for his studies on the spot have convinced him that the
Australians are "a generalized, not a specialized, type of
humanity--that is to say, they are a very primitive people, with more of
the common undeveloped characteristics of man, and less of the qualities
of the specialized races of civilization." Dr Klaatsch's view is that
they are survivals of a primitive race which inhabited a vast Antarctic
continent of which South America, South Africa and Australia once formed
a part, as evidenced by the identity of many species of birds and fish.
He urges that the similarities of some of the primitive races of India
and Africa to the aborigines of Australia are indications that they were
peopled from one common stock. This theory, plausible and attractive as
it is, and fitting in, as it does, with the acknowledged primitive
character of the Australian blackfellow, overlooks, nevertheless, the
Tasmanian difficulty. Why should a Papuan type be found in what was
certainly once a portion of the Australian continent? The theory which
meets this difficulty is that which has in its favour the greatest
weight of evidence, viz. that the continent was first inhabited by a
Papuan type of man who made his way thither from Flores and Timor, New
Guinea and the Coral Sea. That in days so remote as to be undateable, a
Dravidian people driven from their primitive home in the hills of the
Indian Deccan made their way south via Ceylon (where they may to-day be
regarded as represented by the Veddahs) and eventually sailed and
drifted in their bark boats to the western and north-western shores of
Australia. It is difficult to believe that they at first arrived in such
numbers as at once to overwhelm the Papuan population. There were
probably several migrations. What seems certain, if this theory is
adopted, is that they did at last accumulate to an extent which
permitted of their mastering the former occupiers of the soil, who were
probably in very scattered and defenceless communities.

In the slow process of time they drove them into the most southerly
corner of Australia, just as the Saxons drove the Celts into Cornwall
and the Welsh hills. Even if this Dravidian invasion is put subsequent
to the Bass Strait forming, even if one allows the probability of much
crossing between the two races at first, in time the hostilities would
be renewed. With their earliest settlements on the north-north-west
coasts, the Dravidians would probably tend to spread out north,
north-east and east, and a southerly line of retreat would be the most
natural one for the Papuans.[3] When at last they were driven to the
Strait they would drift over on rafts or in clumsy shallops; being
thereafter left in peace to concentrate their race, then possibly only
in an approximately pure state, in the island to which the Dravidians
would not take the trouble to follow them, and where they would have
centuries in which once more to fix their racial type and emphasize over
again those differences, perhaps temporarily marred by crossing, which
were found to exist on the arrival of the Whites.

This Indo-Aryan origin for the Australian blackfellows is borne out by
their physique. In spite of their savagery they are admitted by those
who have studied them to be far removed from the low or Simian type of
man. Dr Charles Pickering (1805-1878), who studied the Australians on
the spot, writes: "Strange as it may appear, I would refer to an
Australian as the finest model of the human proportions I have ever met;
in muscular development combining perfect symmetry, activity and
strength, while his head might have compared with the antique bust of a
philosopher." Huxley concluded, from descriptions, that "the Deccan
tribes are indistinguishable from the Australian races." Sir W.W. Hunter
states that the Dravidian tribes were driven southwards in Hindustan,
and that the grammatical relations of their dialects are "expressed by
suffixes," which is true as to the Australian languages. He states that
Bishop Caldwell,[4] whom he calls "the great missionary scholar of the
Dravidian tongue," showed that the south and western Australian tribes
use almost the same words for "I, thou, he, we, you, as the Dravidian
fishermen on the Madras coast." When in addition to all this it is found
that physically the Dravidians resemble the Australians; that the
boomerang is known among the wild tribes of the Deccan alone (with the
doubtful exception of ancient Egypt) of all parts of the world except
Australia, and that the Australian canoes are like those of the
Dravidian coast tribes, it seems reasonable enough to assume that the
Australian natives are Dravidians, exiled in remote times from
Hindustan, though when their migration took place and how they traversed
the Indian Ocean must remain questions to which, by their very nature,
there can be no satisfactory answer.

The low stage of culture of the Australians when they reached their new
home is thus accounted for, but their stagnation is remarkable, because
they must have been frequently in contact with more civilized peoples.
In the north of Australia there are traces of Malay and Papuan blood.
That a far more advanced race had at one time a settlement on the
north-west coast is indicated by the cave-paintings and sculptures
discovered by Sir George Grey. In caves of the valley of the Glenelg
river, north-west Australia, about 60 m. inland and 20 m. south of
Prince Regent's river, are representations of human heads and bodies,
apparently of females clothed to the armpits, but all the faces are
without any indication of mouths. The heads are surrounded with a kind
of head-dress or halo and one wears a necklace. They are drawn in red,
blue and yellow. The figures are almost life-size. Rough sculptures,
too, were found, and two large square mounds formed of loose stones, and
yet perfect parallelograms in outline, placed due east and west. In the
same district Sir George Grey noticed among the blackfellows people he
describes as "almost white." On the Gascoyne river, too, were seen
natives of an olive colour, quite good-looking; and in the neighbourhood
of Sydney rock-carvings have been also found. All this points to a
temporary occupation by a race at a far higher stage of culture than any
known Australians, who were certainly never capable of executing even
the crude works of art described.

  Physique.

Physically the typical Australian is the equal of the average European
in height, but is inferior in muscular development, the legs and arms
being of a leanness which is often emphasized by an abnormal corpulence.
The bones are delicately formed, and there is the lack of calf usual in
black races. The skull is abnormally thick and the cerebral capacity
small. The head is long and somewhat narrow, the forehead broad and
receding, with overhanging brows, the eyes sunken, large and black, the
nose thick and very broad at the nostrils. The mouth is large and the
lips thick but not protuberant. The teeth are large, white and strong.
In old age they appear much ground down; particularly is this the case
with women, who chew the different kinds of fibres, of which they make
nets and bags. The lower jaw is heavy; the cheekbones somewhat high, and
the chin small and receding. The neck is thicker and shorter than that
of most Europeans. The colour of the skin is a deep copper or chocolate,
never sooty black. When born, the Australian baby is of a much lighter
colour than its parents and remains so for about a week. The hair is
long, black or very dark auburn, wavy and sometimes curly, but never
woolly, and the men have luxuriant beards and whiskers, often of an
auburn tint, while the whole body inclines to hairiness. On the Balonne
river, Queensland, Baron Mikluho Maclay found a group of hairless
natives. The head hair is usually matted with grease and dirt, but when
clean is fine and glossy. The skin gives out an objectionable odour,
owing to the habit of anointing the body with fish-oils, but the true
fetor of the negro is lacking in the Australian. The voices of the
blackfellows are musical. Their mental faculties, though inferior to
those of the Polynesian race, are not contemptible. They have much
acuteness of perception for the relations of individual objects, but
little power of generalization. No word exists in their language for
such general terms as tree, bird or fish; yet they have invented a name
for every species of vegetable and animal they know. The grammatical
structure of some north Australian languages has a considerable degree
of refinement. The verb presents a variety of conjugations, expressing
nearly all the moods and tenses of the Greek. There is a dual, as well
as a plural form in the declension of verbs, nouns, pronouns and
adjectives. The distinction of genders is not marked, except in proper
names of men and women. All parts of speech, except adverbs, are
declined by terminational inflections. There are words for the
elementary numbers, one, two, three; but "four" is usually expressed by
"two-two." They have no idea of decimals. The number and diversity of
separate languages is bewildering.

  Character.

In disposition the Australians are a bright, laughter-loving folk, but
they are treacherous, untruthful and hold human life cheaply. They have
no great physical courage. They are mentally in the condition of
children. None of them has an idea of what the West calls morality,
except the simple one of right or wrong arising out of property. A wife
will be beaten without mercy for unfaithfulness to her husband, but the
same wife will have had to submit to the first-night promiscuity, a
widespread revel which Roth shows is a regular custom in
north-west-central Queensland. A husband claims his wife as his absolute
property, but he has no scruple in handing her over for a time to
another man. There is, however, no proof that anything like community of
women or unlimited promiscuity exists anywhere. It would be wrong,
however, to conclude that moral considerations have led up to this state
of things. Of sexual morality, in the everyday sense of the word, there
is none. In his treatment of women the aboriginal may be ranked lower
than even the Fuegians. Yet the Australian is capable of strong
affections, and the blind (of whom there have always been a great
number) are cared for, and are often the best fed in a tribe.

  Manners.

The Australians when first discovered were found to be living in almost
a prehistoric simplicity. Their food was the meat they killed in the
chase, or seeds and roots, grubs or reptiles. They never, in any
situation, cultivated the soil for any kind of food-crop. They never
reared any kind of cattle, or kept any domesticated animal except the
dog, which probably came over with them in their canoes. They nowhere
built permanent dwellings, but contented themselves with mere hovels for
temporary shelter. They neither manufactured nor possessed any chattels
beyond such articles of clothing, weapons, ornaments and utensils as
they might carry on their persons, or in the family store-bag for daily
use. In most districts both sexes are entirely nude. Sometimes in the
south during the cold season they wear a cloak of skin or matting,
fastened with a skewer, but open on the right-hand side.

When going through the bush they sometimes wear an apron of skins, for
protection merely. No headgear is worn, except sometimes a net to
confine the hair, a bunch of feathers, or the tails of small animals.
The breast or back, of both sexes, is usually tattooed, or rather,
scored with rows of hideous raised scars, produced by deep gashes made
at puberty. Their dwellings for the most part are either bowers, formed
of the branches of trees, or hovels of piled logs, loosely covered with
grass or bark, which they can erect in an hour, wherever they encamp.
But some huts of a more substantial form were seen by Captain Matthew
Flinders on the south-east coast in 1799, and by Captain King and Sir T.
Mitchell on the north-east, where they no longer appear. The ingenuity
of the race is mostly exhibited in the manufacture of their weapons of
warfare and the chase. While the use of the bow and arrow does not seem
to have occurred to them, the spear and axe are in general use, commonly
made of hard-wood; the hatchets of stone, and the javelins pointed with
stone or bone. The characteristic weapon of the Australian is the
boomerang (q.v.). Their nets, made by women, either of the tendons of
animals or the fibres of plants, will catch and hold the kangaroo or the
emu, or the very large fish of Australian rivers. Canoes of bent bark,
for the inland waters, are hastily prepared at need; but the inlets and
straits of the north-eastern sea-coast are navigated by larger canoes
and rafts of a better construction. As to food, they are omnivorous. In
central Queensland and elsewhere, snakes, both venomous and harmless,
are eaten, the head being first carefully smashed to pulp with a stone.

  Tribal organization.

The tribal organization of the Australians was based on that of the
family. There were no hereditary or formally elected chiefs, nor was
there any vestige of monarchy. The affairs of a tribe were ruled by a
council of men past middle age. Each tribe occupied a recognized
territory, averaging perhaps a dozen square miles, and used a common
dialect. This district was subdivided between the chief heads of
families. Each family, or family group, had a dual organization which
has been termed (1) the Social, (2) the Local. The first was
matriarchal, inheritance being reckoned through the mother. No
territorial association was needed. All belonged to the same totem or
totemic class, and might be scattered throughout the tribe, though
subject to the same marriage laws. The second was patriarchal and of a
strictly territorial nature. A family or group of families had the same
hunting-ground, which was seldom changed, and descended through the
males. Thus, the sons inherited their fathers' hunting-ground, but bore
their mothers' name and therewith the right to certain women for wives.
The Social or matriarchal took precedence of the Local or patriarchal
organization. In many cases it arranged the assemblies and ceremonial of
the tribe; it regulated marriage, descent and relationship; it ordered
blood feuds, it prescribed the rites of hospitality and so on.
Nevertheless the Local side of tribal life in time tended to overwhelm
the Social and to organize the tribe irrespective of matriarchy, and
inclined towards hereditary chieftainship.

The most intricate and stringent rules existed as to marriage within and
without the totemic inter-marrying classes. There is said to be but one
exception to the rule that marriage must be contracted outside the totem
name. This exception was discovered by Messrs Spencer and Gillen among
the Arunta of central Australia, some allied septs, and their nearest
neighbours to the north, the Kaitish. This tribe may legally marry
within the totem, but always avoids such unions. Even in casual amours
these class laws were invariably observed, and the young man or woman
who defied them was punished, he with death, she with spearing or
beating. At the death of a man, his widows passed to his brother of the
same totem class. Such a system gave to the elder men of a tribe a
predominant position, and generally respect was shown to the aged. Laws
and penalties in protection of property were enforced by the tribe.
Thus, among some tribes of Western Australia the penalty for abducting
another's wife was to stand with leg extended while each male of the
tribe stuck his spear into it. Laws, however, did not protect the women,
who were the mere chattels of their lords. Stringent rules, too,
governed the food of women and the youth of both sexes, and it was only
after initiation that boys were allowed to eat of all the game the
forest provided. In every case of death from disease or unknown causes
sorcery was suspected and an inquest held, at which the corpse was asked
by each relative in succession the name of the murderer. This formality
having been gone through, the flight of the first bird which passed over
the body was watched, the direction being regarded as that in which the
sorcerer must be sought. Sometimes the nearest relative sleeps with his
head on the corpse, in the belief that he will dream of the murderer.
The most sacred duty an Australian had to perform was the avenging of
the death of a kinsman, and he was the object of constant taunts and
insults till he had done so. Cannibalism was almost universal, either in
the case of enemies killed in battle or when animal food was scarce. In
the Luritcha tribe it was customary when a child was in weak health to
kill a younger and healthy one and feed the weakling on its flesh.
Cannibalism seems also to have sometimes been in the nature of a funeral
observance, in honour of the deceased, of whom the relatives reverently
ate portions.

  Religion.

They had no special forms of religious worship, and no idols. The
evidence on the question of whether they believed in a Supreme Being is
very contradictory. Messrs Spencer and Gillen appear to think that such
rudimentary idea of an All-Father as has, it is thought, been detected
among the blackfellows is an exotic growth fostered by contact with
missionaries. A.W. Howitt and Dr Roth appear to have satisfied
themselves of a belief, common to most tribes, in a mythic being (he has
different names in different tribes) having some of the attributes of a
Supreme Deity. But Mr Howitt finds in this being "no trace of a divine
nature, though under favourable conditions the beliefs might have
developed into an actual religion." Other authorities suggest that it is
going much too far to deny the existence of religion altogether, and
instance as proof of the divinity of the supra-normal anthropomorphic
beings of the Baiame class, the fact that the Yuin and cognate tribes
dance around the image of Daramulun (their equivalent of Baiame) and the
medicine men "invocate his name." A good deal perhaps depends on each
observer's view of what religion really is. The Australians believed in
spirits, generally of an evil nature, and had vague notions of an
after-life. The only idea of a god known to be entertained by them seems
to be that of the Euahlayi and Kamilaori tribe, Baiame, a gigantic old
man lying asleep for ages, with his head resting on his arm, which is
deep in the sand. He is expected one day to awake and eat up the world.
Researches go to show that Baiame has his counterpart in other tribes,
the myth varying greatly in detail. But the Australians are
distinguished by possessing elaborate initiatory ceremonies.
Circumcision of one or two kinds was usual in the north and south, but
not in Western Australia or on the Murray river. In South Australia boys
had to undergo three stages of initiation in a place which women were
forbidden to approach. At about ten they were covered with blood from
head to foot, several elder men bleeding themselves for the purpose. At
about twelve or fourteen circumcision took place and (or sometimes as an
alternative on the east coast) a front tooth was knocked out, to the
accompaniment of the booming of the bullroarer (q.v.). At the age of
puberty the lad was tattooed or scarred with gashes cut in back,
shoulders, arms and chest, and the septum of the nose was pierced. The
gashes varied in patterns for the different tribes. Girls, too, were
scarred at puberty and had teeth knocked out, &c. The ceremonies--known
to the Whites under the native generic term for initiatory rites,
_Bora_,--were much the same throughout Australia. Polygamy was rare, due
possibly to the scarcity of women.[5] Infanticide was universally
recognized. The mode of disposing of the dead varied. Among some tribes
a circular grave was dug and the body placed in it with its face towards
the east, and a high mound covered with bark or thatch raised over it.
In New South Wales the body is often burned and the ashes buried. On the
Lower Murray the body is placed on a platform of sticks and left to
decay. Young children are often not buried for months, but are carried
about by their mothers. At the funeral of men there is much mourning,
the female relatives cutting or tearing their hair off and plastering
their faces with clay, but for women no public ceremonies took place.

The numbers of the native Australians are steadily diminishing. It was
estimated that when first visited by Europeans the native population
did not much exceed 200,000. A remnant of the race exists in each of the
provinces, while a few tribes still wander over the interior.

  AUTHORITIES.--Dr A.W. Howitt, _The Native Tribes of South-east
  Australia_ (1904) and _On the Organization of Australian Tribes_
  (1889); G.T. Bettany, _The Red, Brown and Black Men of Australia_
  (1890); B. Spencer and F.J. Gillen, _Native Tribes of Central
  Australia_ (1899); _The Northern Tribes of Central Australia_ (London,
  1904); E.M. Curr, _The Australian Race_ (3 vols., 1886-1887); G.W.
  Rusden, _History of Australia_ (1897); _Australasia_, British Empire
  Series (Kegan Paul & Co., 1900); A.R. Wallace, _Australasia_ (1880,
  new ed., 2 vols., 1893-1895); Rev. Lorimer Fison and Dr A.W. Howitt,
  _Kamilaroi and Kurnai, Group Marriage and Relationship_ (Melbourne,
  1880); H. Ling Roth, _Queensland Aborigines_ (Brisbane, 1897); Carl
  Lumholtz, _Among Cannibals_ (1889); Walter E. Roth, _Ethnological
  Studies among the North-west-central Queensland Aborigines_ (London,
  1897); Mrs K. Langloh Parker, _Euahlayi Tribes_ (1905); F.J. Gillen,
  _Notes on Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the Macdonnell
  Ranges belonging to the Arunta Tribe_; J.E. Frazer, "The Beginnings of
  Religion and Totemism among the Australian Aborigines," _Fortnightly
  Review_, July 1905; N.W. Thomas, _Native Tribes of Australia_ (1907).
       (C. Ar.)

HISTORY

1. _The Discovery of Australia_.

It is impossible to say who were the first discoverers of Australia,
although there is evidence that the Chinese had some knowledge of the
continent so far back as the 13th century. The Malays, also, would seem
to have been acquainted with the northern coast; while Marco Polo, who
visited the East at the close of the 13th century, makes reference to
the reputed existence of a great southern continent. There is in
existence a map, dedicated to Henry VIII. of England, on which a large
southern land is shown, and the tradition of a Terra Australis appears
to have been current for a long period before it enters into authentic
history.

In 1503 a French navigator named Binot Paulmyer, sieur de Gonneville,
was blown out of his course, and landed on a large island, which was
claimed to be the great southern land of tradition, although Flinders
and other authorities are inclined to think that it must have been
Madagascar. Some French authorities confidently put forward a claim that
Guillaume le Testu, of Provence, sighted the continent in 1531. The
Portuguese also advance claims to be the first discoverers of Australia,
but so far the evidence cannot be said to establish their pretensions.
As early as 1597 the Dutch historian, Wytfliet, describes the Australis
Terra as the most southern of all lands, and proceeds to give some
circumstantial particulars respecting its geographical relation to New
Guinea, venturing the opinion that, were it thoroughly explored, it
would be regarded as a fifth part of the world.

  De Torres.

Early in the 17th century Philip III. of Spain sent out an expedition
from Callao, in Peru, for the purpose of searching for a southern
continent. The little fleet comprised three vessels, with the Portuguese
pilot, De Quiros, as navigator, and De Torres as admiral or military
commander. They left Callao on the 21st of December 1605, and in the
following year discovered the island now known as Espiritu Santo, one of
the New Hebrides group, which De Quiros, under the impression that it
was indeed the land of which he was in search, named _La Austrialia del
Espiritu Santo_. Sickness and discontent led to a mutiny on De Quiros'
vessel, and the crew, overpowering their officers during the night,
forced the captain to navigate his ship to Mexico. Thus, abandoned by
his consort, De Torres, compelled to bear up for the Philippines to
refit, discovered and sailed through the strait that bears his name, and
may even have caught a glimpse of the northern coast of the Australian
continent. His discovery was not, however, made known until 1792, when
Dalrymple rescued his name from oblivion, bestowing it upon the passage
which separates New Guinea from Australia. De Quiros returned to Spain
to re-engage in the work of petitioning the king to despatch an
expedition for the purpose of prosecuting the discovery of the Terra
Australis. He was finally successful in his petitions, but died before
accomplishing his work, and was buried in an unknown grave in Panama,
never being privileged to set his foot upon the continent the discovery
of which was the inspiration of his life.

  Dutch discoverers.

During the same year in which De Torres sailed through the strait
destined to make him famous, a little Dutch vessel called the "Duyfken,"
or "Dove," set sail from Bantam, in Java, on a voyage of discovery. This
ship entered the Gulf of Carpentaria, and sailed south as far as Cape
Keerweer, or Turn-again. Here some of the crew landed, but, being
attacked by natives, made no attempt to explore the country. In 1616
Dirk Hartog discovered the island bearing his name. In 1622 the
"Leeuwin," or "Lioness," made some discoveries on the south-west coast;
and during the following year the yachts "Pera" and "Arnheim" explored
the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria. Arnheim Land, a portion of the
Northern Territory, still appears on many maps as a memento of this
voyage. Among other early Dutch discoverers were Edel; Pool, in 1629, in
the Gulf of Carpentaria; Nuyts, in the "Guide Zeepaard," along the
southern coast, which he called, after himself, Nuyts Land; De Witt; and
Pelsaert, in the "Batavia." Pelsaert was wrecked on Houtman's Abrolhos;
his crew mutinied, and he and his party suffered greatly from want of
water. The record of his voyage is interesting from the fact that he was
the first to carry back to Europe an authentic account of the western
coast of Australia, which he described in any but favourable terms. It
is to Dutch navigators in the early portion of the 17th century that we
owe the first really authentic accounts of the western coast and
adjacent islands, and in many instances the names given by these
mariners to prominent physical features are still retained. By 1665 the
Dutch possessed rough charts of almost the whole of the western
littoral, while to the mainland itself they had given the name of New
Holland. Of the Dutch discoverers, Pelsaert was the only one who made
any detailed observations of the character of the country inland, and it
may here be remarked that his journal contains the first notice and
description of the kangaroo that has come down to us.

In 1642 Abel Janszoon Tasman sailed on a voyage of discovery from
Batavia, the headquarters of the governor and council of the Dutch East
Indies, under whose auspices the expedition was undertaken. He was
furnished with a yacht, the "Heemskirk," and a fly-boat, the "Zeehaen"
(or "Sea Hen"), under the command of Captain Jerrit Jansen. He left
Batavia on what has been designated by Dutch historians the "Happy
Voyage," on the 14th of August 1642. After a visit to the Mauritius,
then a Dutch possession, Tasman bore away to the south-east, and on the
24th of November sighted the western coast of the land which he named
Van Diemen's Land, in honour of the governor under whose directions he
was acting. The honour was later transferred to the discoverer himself,
and the island is now known as Tasmania. Tasman doubled the southern
extremity of Van Diemen's Land and explored the east coast for some
distance. The ceremony of hoisting a flag and taking possession of the
country in the name of the government of the Netherlands was actually
performed, but the description of the wildness of the country, and of
the fabulous giants by which Tasman's sailors believed it to be
inhabited, deterred the Dutch from occupying the island, and by the
international principle of "non-user" it passed from their hands.
Resuming his voyage in an easterly direction, Tasman sighted the west
coast of the South Island of New Zealand on the 13th of December of the
same year, and describes the coast-line as consisting of "high
mountainous country."

  Dampier.

The first English navigator to sight the Australian continent was
William Dampier, who made a visit to these shores in 1688, as supercargo
of the "Cygnet," a trader whose crew had turned buccaneers. On his
return to England he published an account of his voyage, which resulted
in his being sent out in the "Roebuck" in 1699 to prosecute his
discoveries further. To him we owe the exploration of the coast for
about 900 m.--from Shark's Bay to Dampier's Archipelago, and thence to
Roebuck Bay. He appears to have landed in several places in search of
water. His account of the country was quite as unfavourable as
Pelsaert's. He described it as barren and sterile, and almost devoid of
animals, the only one of any importance somewhat resembling a raccoon--a
strange creature, which advanced by great bounds or leaps instead of
walking, using only its hind legs, and covering 12 or 15 ft. at a time.
The reference is, of course, to the kangaroo, which Pelsaert had also
remarked and quaintly described some sixty years previously.

During the interval elapsing between Dampier's two voyages, an accident
led to the closer examination of the coasts of Western Australia by the
Dutch. In 1684 a vessel had sailed from Holland for the Dutch
possessions in the East Indies, and after rounding the Cape of Good
Hope, she was never again heard of. Some twelve years afterwards the
East India Company fitted out an expedition under the leadership of
Commander William de Vlamingh, with the object of searching for any
traces of the lost vessel on the western shores of New Holland. Towards
the close of the year 1696 this expedition reached the island of
Rottnest, which was thoroughly explored, and early the following year a
landing party discovered and named the Swan river. The vessels then
proceeded northward without finding any traces of the object of their
search, but, at the same time, making fairly accurate charts of the
coast-line.

  Cook.

The great voyage of Captain James Cook, in 1769-1770, was primarily
undertaken for the purposes of observing the transit of Venus, but he
was also expressly commissioned to ascertain "whether the unexplored
part of the southern hemisphere be only an immense mass of water, or
contain another continent." H.M.S. "Endeavour," the vessel fitted out
for the voyage, was a small craft of 370 tons, carrying twenty-two guns,
and built originally for a collier, with a view rather to strength than
to speed. Chosen by Cook himself, she was renamed the "Endeavour," in
allusion to the great work which her commander was setting out to
achieve. Mr Charles Green was commissioned to conduct the astronomical
observations, and Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Solander were appointed
botanists to the expedition. After successfully observing the transit
from the island of Tahiti, or Otaheite, as Cook wrote it, the
"Endeavour's" head was turned south, and then north-west, beating about
the Pacific in search of the eastern coast of the great continent whose
western shores had been so long known to the Dutch. On the 6th of
October 1769 the coast of New Zealand was sighted, and two days later
Cook cast anchor in Poverty Bay, so named from the inhospitality and
hostility of the natives.

After voyaging westward for nearly three weeks, Cook, on the 19th of
April 1770, sighted the eastern coast of Australia at a point which he
named after his lieutenant, who discovered it, Point Hicks, and which
modern geographers identify with Cape Everard.

The "Endeavour" then coasted northward, and after passing and naming
Mount Dromedary, the Pigeon House, Point Upright, Cape St George and Red
Point, Botany Bay was discovered on the 28th of April 1770, and as it
appeared to offer a suitable anchorage, the "Endeavour" entered the bay
and dropped anchor. The ship brought-to opposite a group of natives, who
were cooking over a fire. The great navigator and his crew, unacquainted
with the character of the Australian aborigines, were not a little
astonished that these natives took no notice of them or their
proceedings. Even the splash of the anchor in the water, and the noise
of the cable running out through the hawse-hole, in no way disturbed
them at their occupation, or caused them to evince the slightest
curiosity. But as the captain of the "Endeavour" ordered out the pinnace
and prepared to land, the natives threw off their nonchalance; for on
the boat approaching the shore, two men, each armed with a bundle of
spears, presented themselves on a projecting rock and made threatening
signs to the strangers. It is interesting to note that the ingenious
_wommera_, or throw-stick, which is peculiar to Australia, was first
observed on this occasion. As the men were evidently determined to
oppose any attempt at landing, a musket was discharged between them, in
the hope that they would be frightened by the noise, but it produced no
effect beyond causing one of them to drop his bundle of spears, of
which, however, he immediately repossessed himself, and with his comrade
resumed the same menacing attitude. At last one cast a stone towards the
boat, which earned him a charge of small shot in the leg. Nothing
daunted, the two ran back into the bush, and presently returned
furnished with shields made of bark, with which to protect themselves
from the firearms of the crew. Such intrepidity is certainly worthy of
passing notice. Unlike the American Indians, who supposed Columbus and
his crew to be supernatural beings, and their ships in some way endowed
with life, and were thrown into convulsions of terror by the first
discharge of firearms which they witnessed, these Australians were
neither excited to wonder by the ship nor overawed by the superior
number and unknown weapons of the strangers. Cook examined the bay in
the pinnace, and landed several times; but by no endeavour could he
induce the natives to hold any friendly communication with him. The
well-known circumstance of the great variety of new plants here
obtained, from which Botany Bay derives its name, should not be passed
over. Before quitting the bay the ceremony was performed of hoisting the
Union Jack, first on the south shore, and then near the north head,
formal possession of the territory being thus taken for the British
crown. During the sojourn in Botany Bay the crew had to perform the
painful duty of burying a comrade--a seaman named Forby Sutherland, who
was in all probability the first British subject whose body was
committed to Australian soil.

After leaving Botany Bay, Cook sailed northward. He saw and named Port
Jackson, but forbore to enter the finest natural harbour in Australia.
Broken Bay and other inlets, and several headlands, were also seen and
named, but the vessel did not come to an anchor till Moreton Bay was
reached, although the wind prevented Cook from entering this harbour.
Still sailing northward, taking notes as he proceeded for a rough chart
of the coast, and landing at Bustard and Keppel Bays and the Bay of
Inlets, Cook passed over 1300 m. without the occurrence of any event
worthy of being chronicled, till suddenly one night at ten o'clock the
water was found to shoal, without any sign of breakers or land. While
Cook was speculating on the cause of this phenomenon, and was in the act
of ordering out the boats to take soundings, the "Endeavour" struck
heavily, and fell over so much that the guns, spare cables, and other
heavy gear had at once to be thrown overboard to lighten the ship. As
day broke, attempts were made to float the vessel off with the morning
tide; but these were unsuccessful. The water was rising so rapidly in
the hold that with four pumps constantly going the crew could hardly
keep it in check. At length one of the midshipmen suggested the device
of "fothering," which he had seen practised in the West Indies. This
consists of passing a sail, attached to cords, and charged with oakum,
wool, and other materials, under the vessel's keel, in such a manner
that the suction of the leak may draw the canvas into the aperture, and
thus partially stop the vent. This was performed with great success, and
the vessel was floated off with the evening tide. The land was soon
after made near the mouth of a small stream, which Cook called, after
the ship, the Endeavour river. A headland close by he named Cape
Tribulation. The ship was steered into the river, and there careened and
thoroughly repaired. Cook having completed the survey of the east coast,
to which he gave the name of New South Wales, sighted and named Cape
York, the northernmost point of Australia, and took final possession of
his discoveries northward from 38° S. to 10½° S., on a spot which he
named Possession Island, thence returning to England by way of Torres
Straits and the Indian Ocean.

The great navigator's second voyage, undertaken in 1772, with the
"Resolution" and the "Adventure," is of less importance. The vessels
became separated, and both at different times visited New Zealand.
Captain Tobias Furneaux, in the "Adventure," also found his way to Storm
Bay in Tasmania. In 1777, while on his way to search for a north-east
passage between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, Cook again touched at
the coast of Tasmania and New Zealand.

On his first voyage, in 1770, Cook had some grounds for the belief that
Van Diemen's Land, as Tasmania was then called, was a separate island.
The observations of Captain Furneaux, however, did not strengthen this
belief, and when making his final voyage, the great navigator appears to
have definitely concluded that it was part of the mainland of Australia.
This continued to be the opinion of geographers until 1798, when Bass
discovered the strait which bears his name. The next recorded expedition
is a memorable one in the annals of Australian history--the despatch of
a British colony to the shores of Botany Bay. The fleet sailed in May
1787, and arrived off the Australian coast early in the following
January.

2. _Inland Exploration._

For a period of twenty-five years after the first establishment of a
British settlement in Australia, the colonists were only acquainted with
the country along the coast extending northwards about 70 m. from Sydney
and about a like distance to the south and shut in to the west by the
Blue Mountain range, forming a narrow strip not more than 50 m. wide at
its broadest part.

  Oxley.

The Blue Mountains attain a height of between 3000 and 4000 ft. only,
but they are intersected with precipitous ravines 1500 ft. deep, which
baffled every effort to reach the interior until in 1813, when a summer
of severe drought had made it of vital importance to find new pastures,
three of the colonists, Messrs Blaxland, Lawson and Wentworth, more
fortunate than their predecessors in exploration, after crossing the
Nepean river at Emu Plains and ascending the Dividing Range, were able
to reach a position enabling them to obtain a view of the grassy valley
of the Fish river, which lies on the farther side of the Dividing Range.
The western descent of the mountains appeared to the explorers
comparatively easy, and they returned to report their discovery. A line
of road was constructed across the mountains as far as the Macquarie
river by the surveyor, Mr Evans, and the town of Bathurst laid out. This
marks the beginning of the occupation of the interior of the continent.
Some small expeditions were made from Bathurst, resulting in the
discovery of the Lachlan, and in 1816 the first of the great exploration
expeditions of Australia was fitted out under Lieutenant Oxley, R.N.
Oxley was accompanied by Mr Evans and Mr Allan Cunningham the botanist,
and the object of his expedition was to trace the course of the Lachlan
in a westerly direction. Oxley traced the river until it lost itself in
the swamps east of 147° E., then crossing the river he traversed the
country between the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee as far as 34° S. and 144°
30' E. On his return journey Oxley again crossed the Lachlan about 160
m., measured along the river, below the point where he left it on his
journey south. Continuing in a north-easterly direction Oxley struck the
Macquarie river at a place he called Wellington, and from this place in
the following year he organized a second expedition in hopes of
discovering an inland sea. He was, however, disappointed in this, as
after descending the course of the Macquarie below Mount Harris, he
found that the river ended in an immense swamp overgrown with reeds.
Oxley now turned aside--led by Mr Evans's report of the country
eastward--crossed the Arbuthnot range, and traversing the Liverpool
Plains, and ascending the Peel and Cockburn rivers to the Blue
Mountains, gained sight of the open sea, which he reached at Port
Macquarie. A valuable extension of geographical knowledge had been
gained by this circuitous journey of more than 800 m. Yet its result was
a disappointment to those who had looked for means of inland navigation
by the Macquarie river, and by its supposed issue in a mediterranean
sea.

During the next two or three years public attention was occupied with
Captain King's maritime explorations of the north-west coast in three
successive voyages, and by explorations of Western Australia in 1821.
These steps were followed by the foundation of a settlement on Melville
Island, in the extreme north, which, however, was soon abandoned. In
1823 Lieutenant Oxley proceeded to Moreton Bay and Port Curtis, the
first place 500 m., the other 690 m. north of Sydney, to choose the site
of a new penal establishment. From a shipwrecked English sailor he met
with, who had lived with the savages, he heard of the river Brisbane.
About the same time, in the opposite direction, south-west of Sydney, a
large extent of the interior was revealed. Messrs Hamilton Hume and
Hovell set out from Lake George, crossed the Murrumbidgee, and, after
following the river for a short distance, struck south, skirting the
foothills of what are now known as the Australian Alps until they
reached a fine river, which was called the Hume after the leader's
father. Crossing the Murray at Albury, the explorers, bearing to the
south-west, skirted the western shore of Port Philip and reached the
sea-coast near where the town of Geelong now stands. In 1827 and the two
following years, Cunningham prosecuted instructive explorations on both
sides of the Liverpool range, between the upper waters of the Hunter and
those of the Peel and other tributaries of the Brisbane north of New
South Wales. Some of his discoveries, including those of Pandora's Pass
and the Darling Downs, were of great practical utility.

  Darling.

By this time much had thus been done to obtain an acquaintance with the
eastern parts of the Australian continent, although the problem of what
could become of the large rivers flowing north-west and south-west into
the interior was still unsolved. With a view to determine this question,
Governor Sir Ralph Darling, in the year 1828, sent out the expedition
under Captain Charles Sturt, who, proceeding first to the marshes at the
end of the Macquarie river, found his progress checked by the dense mass
of reeds in that quarter. He therefore turned westward, and struck a
large river, with many affluents, to which he gave the name of the
Darling. This river, flowing from north-east to south-west, drains the
marshes in which the Macquarie and other streams from the south appeared
to be lost. The course of the Murrumbidgee, a deep and rapid river, was
followed by the same eminent explorer in his second expedition in 1831
with a more satisfactory result. He travelled on this occasion nearly
2000 m., and discovered that both the Murrumbidgee, carrying with it the
waters of the Lachlan morass, and likewise the Darling, from a more
northerly region, finally joined another and larger river. This stream,
the Murray, in the upper part of its course runs in a north-westerly
direction, but afterwards turning southwards, almost at a right angle,
expands into Lake Alexandrina on the south coast, about 60 m. south-east
of the town of Adelaide, and finally enters the sea at Encounter Bay in
E. long. 139°.

  Mitchell.

After gaining a practical solution of the problem of the destination of
the westward-flowing rivers, Sir Thomas Mitchell, in 1833, led an
expedition northward to the upper branches of the Darling; the party met
with a sad disaster in the death of Richard Cunningham, brother of the
eminent botanist, who was murdered by the blacks near the Bogan river.
The expedition reached the Darling on the 25th of May 1833, and after
establishing a depot at Fort Bourke, Mitchell traced the Darling
southwards for 300 m. until he was certain the river was identical with
that reported by Sturt as joining the Murray about 142° E.

  Eyre.

Meantime, from the new colony of Adelaide, South Australia, on the
shores of Gulf St Vincent, a series of adventurous journeys to the north
and to the west was begun by Mr Eyre, who explored a country very
difficult of access. In 1840 he performed a feat of extraordinary
personal daring, travelling all the way along the barren sea-coast of
the Great Australian Bight, from Spencer Gulf to King George Sound. Eyre
also explored the interior north of the head of Spencer Gulf, where he
was misled, however, by appearances to form an erroneous theory about
the water-surfaces named Lake Torrens. It was left to the veteran
explorer, Sturt, to achieve the arduous enterprise of penetrating from
the Darling northward to the very centre of the continent. This was in
1845, the route lying for the most part over a stony desert, where the
heat (reaching 131° Fahr.), with scorching winds, caused much suffering
to the party. The most northerly point reached by Sturt on this occasion
was about S. lat. 24° 25'.

[Illustration: Map: Australia]

  Leichhardt.

A military station having been fixed by the British government at Port
Victoria, on the coast of Arnheim Land, for the protection of
shipwrecked mariners on the north coast, it was thought desirable to
find an overland route between this settlement and Moreton Bay, in what
then was the northern portion of New South Wales, now called Queensland.
This was the object of Dr Leichhardt's expedition in 1844, which
proceeded first along the banks of the Dawson and the Mackenzie,
tributaries of the Fitzroy river, in Queensland. It thence passed
farther north to the Burdekin, ascending to the source of that river,
and turned westward across a table-land, from which there was an easy
descent to the Gulf of Carpentaria. Skirting the low shores of this
gulf, all the way round its upper half to the Roper, Leichhardt crossed
Arnheim Land to the Alligator river, which he descended to the western
shore of the peninsula, and arrived at Port Victoria, otherwise Port
Essington, after a journey of 3000 m., performed within a year and three
months. In 1847 Leichhardt undertook a much more formidable task, that
of crossing the entire continent from east to west. His starting-point
was on the Fitzroy Downs, north of the river Condamine, in Queensland,
between the 26th and 27th degrees of S. latitude. But this eminent
explorer had not proceeded far into the interior before he met his
death, his last despatch dating from the Cogoon, 3rd of April 1848. In
the same region, from 1845 to 1847, Sir Thomas Mitchell and Mr E.B.
Kennedy explored the northern tributaries of the Darling, and a river in
S. lat. 24°, named the Barcoo or Victoria, which flows to the
south-west. This river was more thoroughly examined by Mr A.C. Gregory
in 1858. Mr Kennedy lost his life in 1848, being killed by the natives
while attempting to explore the peninsula of Cape York, from Rockingham
Bay to Weymouth Bay.

Among the performances of less renown, but of much practical utility in
surveying and opening new paths through the country, we may mention that
of Captain Banister, showing the way across the southern part of Western
Australia, from Swan river to King George Sound, and that of Messrs
Robinson and G.H. Haydon in 1844, making good the route from Port
Phillip to Gipps' Land with loaded drays, through a dense tangled scrub,
which had been described by Strzelecki as his worst obstacle. Again, in
Western Australia there were the explorations of the Arrowsmith, the
Murchison, the Gascoyne, and the Ashburton rivers, by Captain Grey, Mr
Roe, Governor Fitzgerald, Mr R. Austin, and the brothers Gregory, whose
discoveries have great importance from a geographical point of view.

  Stuart.

These local researches, and the more comprehensive attempts of
Leichhardt and Mitchell to solve the chief problems of Australian
geography, must yield in importance to the grand achievement of Mr
Stuart in 1862. The first of his tours independently performed, in 1858
and 1859, were around the South Australian lakes, namely, Lake Torrens,
Lake Eyre and Lake Gairdner. These waters had been erroneously taken for
parts of one vast horse-shoe or sickle shaped lake, only some 20 m.
broad, believed to encircle a large portion of the inland country, with
drainage at one end by a marsh into Spencer Gulf. The mistake, shown in
all the old maps of Australia, had originated in a curious optical
illusion. When Mr Eyre viewed the country from Mount Deception in 1840,
looking between Lake Torrens and the lake which now bears his own name,
the refraction of light from the glittering crust of salt that covers a
large space of stony or sandy ground produced an appearance of water.
The error was discovered, after eighteen years, by the explorations of
Mr Babbage and Major Warburton in 1858, while Mr Stuart, about the same
time, gained a more complete knowledge of the same district.

A reward of £10,000 having been offered by the legislature of South
Australia to the first man who should traverse the whole continent from
south to north, starting from the city of Adelaide, Mr Stuart resolved
to make the attempt. He started in March 1860, passing Lake Torrens and
Lake Eyre, beyond which he found a pleasant, fertile country till he
crossed the Macdonnell range of mountains, just under the line of the
tropic of Capricorn. On the 23rd of April he reached a mountain in S.
lat. nearly 22°, and E. long. nearly 134°, which is the most central
marked point of the Australian continent, and has been named Central
Mount Stuart. Mr Stuart did not finish his task on this occasion, on
account of indisposition and other causes. But the 18th degree of
latitude had been reached, where the watershed divided the rivers of the
Gulf of Carpentaria from the Victoria river, flowing towards the
north-west coast. He had also proved that the interior of Australia was
not a stony desert, like the region visited by Sturt in 1845. On the
first day of the next year, 1861, Mr Stuart again started for a second
attempt to cross the continent, which occupied him eight months. He
failed, however, to advance farther than one geographical degree north
of the point reached in 1860, his progress being arrested by dense
scrubs and the want of water.

  Burke and Wills.

Meanwhile, in the province of Victoria, by means of a fund subscribed
among the colonists and a grant by the legislature, the ill-fated
expedition of Messrs Burke and Wills was started. It made for the Barcoo
(Cooper's Creek), with a view to reach the Gulf of Carpentaria by a
northerly course midway between Sturt's track to the west and
Leichhardt's to the east. The leading men of the party were Mr Robert
O'Hara Burke, an officer of police, and Mr William John Wills, of the
Melbourne observatory. Leaving the main body of his party at Menindie on
the Darling under a man named Wright, Burke, with seven men, five horses
and sixteen camels, pushed on for Cooper's Creek, the understanding
being that Wright should follow him in easy stages to the depot proposed
to be there established. Wright frittered away his time in the district
beyond the Darling and did not attempt to follow the party to Cooper's
Creek, and Burke, tired of waiting, determined to push on. Accordingly,
dividing his party, leaving at the depot four men and taking with him
Wills and two men, King and Gray, with a horse and six camels, he left
Cooper's Creek on the 16th of December and crossed the desert traversed
by Sturt fifteen years before. They got on in spite of great
difficulties, past the McKinlay range of mountains, S. lat. 21° and 22°,
and then reached the Flinders river, which flows into the head of the
Gulf of Carpentaria. Here, without actually standing on the sea-beach of
the northern shore, they met the tidal waters of the sea. On the 23rd of
February 1861 they commenced the return journey, having in effect
accomplished the feat of crossing the Australian continent. Gray, who
had fallen ill, died on the 16th of April. Five days later, Burke, Wills
and King had repassed the desert to the place on Cooper's Creek (the
Barcoo, S. lat. 27° 40', E. long. 140° 30'), where they had left the
depot, with the rest of the expedition. Here they experienced a cruel
disappointment. The depot was abandoned; the men in charge had quitted
the place the same day, believing that Burke and those with him were
lost. The men who had thus abandoned the depot rejoined the main body of
the expedition under Wright, who at length moved to Cooper's Creek, and,
incredible to relate, neglected to search for the missing explorers.
Burke, Wills and King, when they found themselves so fearfully left
alone and unprovided in the wilderness, wandered about in that district
till near the end of June. They subsisted miserably on the bounty of
some natives, and partly by feeding on the seeds of a plant called
nardoo. At last both Wills and Burke died of starvation. King, the sole
survivor, was saved by meeting the friendly blacks, and was found alive
in September by Mr A.W. Howitt's party, sent on purpose to find and
relieve that of Burke.

Four other parties, besides Howitt's, were sent out that year from
different Australian provinces. Three of them, respectively commanded by
Mr Walker, Mr Landsborough, and Mr Norman, sailed to the north, where
the latter two landed on the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria, while Mr
Walker marched inland from Rockhampton. The fourth party, under Mr J.
McKinlay, from Adelaide, made for the Barcoo by way of Lake Torrens. By
these means, the unknown region of Mid Australia was simultaneously
entered from the north, south, east and west, and important additions
were made to geographical knowledge Landsborough crossed the entire
continent from north to south. between February and June 1862; and
McKinlay, from south to north, before the end of August in that year.
The interior of New South Wales and Queensland, all that lies east of
the 140th degree of longitude, was examined. The Barcoo or Cooper's
Creek and its tributary streams were traced from the Queensland
mountains, holding a south-westerly course to Lake Eyre in South
Australia; the Flinders, the Gilbert, the Gregory, and other northern
rivers watering the country towards the Gulf of Carpentaria were also
explored. These valuable additions to Australian geography were gained
through humane efforts to relieve the lost explorers. The bodies of
Burke and Wills were recovered and brought to Melbourne for a solemn
public funeral, and a noble monument has been erected to their honour.

Mr Stuart, in 1862, made his third and final attempt to traverse the
continent from Adelaide along a central line, which, inclining a little
westward, reaches the north coast of Arnheim Land, opposite Melville
Island. He started in January, and on the 7th of April reached the
farthest northern point, near S. lat. 17°, where he had turned back in
May of the preceding year. He then pushed on, through a very thick
forest, with scarcely any water, till he came to the streams which
supply the Roper, a river flowing into the western part of the Gulf of
Carpentaria. Having crossed a table-land of sandstone which divides
these streams from those running to the western shores of Arnheim Land,
Mr Stuart, in the month of July, passed down what is called the Adelaide
river of north Australia. Thus he came at length to stand on the verge
of the Indian Ocean; "gazing upon it," a writer has said, "with as much
delight as Balboa, when he crossed the Isthmus of Darien from the
Atlantic to the Pacific." The line crossing Australia which was thus
explored has since been occupied by the electric telegraph connecting
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and other Australian cities with London.

  Gosse.

  Warburton.

A third part, at least, of the interior of the whole continent, between
the central line of Stuart and the known parts of Western Australia,
from about 120° to 134° E. long., an extent of half a million square
miles, still remained a blank in the map. But the two expeditions of
1873, conducted by William Christie Gosse (1842-1881), afterwards deputy
surveyor-general for South Australia, and Colonel (then Major) Egerton
Warburton, made a beginning in the exploration of this _terra incognita_
west of the central telegraph route. That line of more than 1800 m.,
having its southern extremity at the head of Spencer Gulf, its northern
at Port Darwin, in Arnheim Land, passes Central Mount Stuart, in the
middle of the continent, S. lat. 22°, E. long. 134°. Mr Gosse, with men
and horses provided by the South Australian government, started on the
21st of April from the telegraph station 50 m. south of Central Mount
Stuart, to strike into Western Australia. He passed the Reynolds range
and Lake Amadeus in that direction, but was compelled to turn south,
where he found a tract of well-watered grassy land. A singular rock of
conglomerate, 2 m. long, 1 m. wide, and 1100 ft. high, with a spring of
water in its centre, struck his attention. The country was mostly poor
and barren, sandy hillocks, with scanty growth of spinifex. Mr Gosse,
having travelled above 600 m., and getting to 26° 32' S. and 127° E.,
two degrees within the Western Australian boundary, was forced to
return. Meantime a more successful attempt to reach the western coast
from the centre of Australia was made by Major Warburton, with thirty
camels, provided by Mr (afterwards Sir) T. Elder, of South Australia.
Leaving the telegraph line at Alice Springs (23° 40' S., 133° 14' E.),
1120 m. north of Adelaide city, Warburton succeeded in making his way to
the De Grey river, Western Australia. Overland routes had now been found
possible, though scarcely convenient for traffic, between all the widely
separated Australian provinces. In northern Queensland, also, there were
several explorations about this period, with results of some interest.
That performed by Mr W. Hann, with Messrs Warner, Tate and Taylor, in
1873, related to the country north of the Kirchner range, watered by the
Lynd, the Mitchell, the Walsh and the Palmer rivers, on the east side of
the Gulf of Carpentaria. The coasting expedition of Mr G. Elphinstone
Dalrymple, with Messrs Hill and Johnstone, finishing in December 1873,
effected a valuable survey of the inlets and navigable rivers in the
Cape York Peninsula.

  Forrest.

  Giles.

Of the several attempts to cross Western Australia, even Major
Warburton's expedition, the most successful, had failed in the important
particular of determining the nature of the country through which it
passed. Major Warburton had virtually raced across from the Macdonnell
range in South Australia to the headwaters of the Oakover river on the
north-west coast, without allowing himself sufficient time to note the
characteristics of the country. The next important expedition was
differently conducted. John (afterwards Sir John) Forrest was despatched
by the Perth government with general instructions to obtain information
regarding the immense tract of country out of which flow the rivers
falling into the sea on the northern and western shores of Western
Australia. Leaving Yewin, a small settlement about lat. 28° S., long.
116° E., Forrest travelled north-east to the Murchison river, and
followed the course of that river to the Robinson ranges; thence his
course lay generally eastward along the 26th parallel. Forrest and his
party safely crossed the entire extent of Western Australia, and
entering South Australia struck the overland telegraph line at Peake
station, and, after resting, journeyed south to Adelaide. Forrest
traversed seventeen degrees of desert in five months, a very wonderful
achievement, more especially as he was able to give a full report of the
country through which he passed. His report destroyed all hope that
pastoral settlement would extend to the spinifex region; and the main
object of subsequent explorers was to determine the extent of the desert
in the direction of north and south. Ernest Giles made several attempts
to cross the Central Australian Desert, but it was not until his third
attempt that he was successful. His journey ranks almost with Forrest's
in the importance of its results and the success with which the
appalling difficulties of the journey were overcome. Through the
generosity of Sir Thomas Elder, of Adelaide, Giles's expedition was
equipped with camels. It started on the 23rd of May 1875 from Port
Augusta. Working westerly along the line of the 30th parallel, Giles
reached Perth in about five months. After resting in Perth for a short
time, he commenced the return journey, which was made for the most part
between the 24th and 25th parallels, and again successfully traversed
the desert, reaching the overland telegraph line in about seven months.
Giles's journeys added greatly to our knowledge of the characteristics
of Western and South Australia, and he was able to bear out the common
opinion that the interior of Australia west of 132° E. long, is a sandy
and waterless waste, entirely unfit for settlement.

  Recent explorers.

The list of explorers since 1875 is a long one; but after Forrest's and
Giles's expeditions the main object ceased to be the discovery of
pastoral country: a new zest had been added to the cause of exploration,
and most of the smaller expeditions concerned themselves with the search
for gold. Amongst the more important explorations may be ranked those of
Tietkins in 1889, of Lindsay in 1891, of Wells in 1896, of Hübbe in
1896, and of the Hon. David Carnegie in 1896-97. Lindsay's expedition,
which was fitted out by Sir Thomas Elder, the generous patron of
Australian exploration, entered Western Australia about the 26th
parallel south lat., on the line of route taken by Forrest in 1874. From
this point the explorer worked in a south-westerly direction to Queen
Victoria Springs, where he struck the track of Giles's expedition of
1875. From the Springs the expedition went north-west and made a useful
examination of the country lying between 119° and 115° meridians and
between 26° and 28° S. lat. Wells's expedition started from a base about
122° 20' E. and 25° 54' S., and worked northward to the Joanna Springs,
situated on the tropic of Capricorn and near the 124th meridian. From
the springs the journey was continued along the same meridian to the
Fitzroy river. The country passed through was mostly of a forbidding
character, except where the Kimberley district was entered, and the
expedition suffered even more than the usual hardships. The
establishment of the gold-fields, with their large population, caused
great interest to be taken in the discovery of practicable stock routes,
especially from South Australia in the east, and from Kimberley district
in the north. Alive to the importance of the trade, the South Australian
government despatched Hübbe from Oodnadatta to Coolgardie. He
successfully accomplished his journey, but had to report that there was
no practicable route for cattle between the two districts.

One of the most successful expeditions which traversed Western Australia
was that led and equipped by the Hon. David Carnegie, which started in
July 1896, and travelled north-easterly until it reached Alexander
Spring; then turning northward, it traversed the country between Wells's
track of 1896 and the South Australian border. The expedition
encountered very many hardships, but successfully reached Hall Creek in
the Kimberley district. After a few months' rest it started on the
return journey, following Sturt Creek until its termination in Gregory's
Salt Sea, and then keeping parallel with the South Australian border as
far as Lake Macdonald. Rounding that lake the expedition moved
south-west and reached the settled districts in August 1897. The
distance travelled was 5000 m., and the actual time employed was eight
months. This expedition put an end to the hope, so long entertained,
that it was possible to obtain a direct and practicable route for stock
between Kimberley and Coolgardie gold-fields; and it also proved that,
with the possible exception of small isolated patches, the desert
traversed contained no auriferous country.

It may be said that exploration on a large scale is now at an end; there
remain only the spaces, nowhere very extensive, between the tracks of
the old explorers yet to be examined, and these are chiefly in the
Northern Territory and in Western Australia north of the tropic of
Capricorn. The search for gold and the quest for unoccupied pasturage
daily diminish the extent of these areas.

3. _Political History._

  Early colonization.

Of the six Australian states, New South Wales is the oldest. It was in
1788, eighteen years after Captain Cook explored the east coast, that
Port Jackson was founded as a penal station for criminals from England;
and the settlement retained that character, more or less, during the
subsequent fifty years, transportation being virtually suspended in
1839. The colony, however, from 1821 had made a fair start in free
industrial progress. By this time, too, several of the other provinces
had come into existence. Van Diemen's Land, now called Tasmania, had
been occupied as early as 1803. It was an auxiliary penal station under
New South Wales till in 1825 it became a separate government. From this
island, ten years later, parties crossed Bass Strait to Port Phillip,
where a new settlement was shortly established, forming till 1851 a part
of New South Wales, but now the state of Victoria. In 1827 and 1829, an
English company endeavoured to plant a settlement at the Swan river, and
this, added to a small military station established in 1825 at King
George Sound, constituted Western Australia. On the shores of the Gulf
St Vincent, again, from 1835 to 1837, South Australia was created by
another joint-stock company, as an experiment in the Wakefield scheme of
colonization. Such were the political component parts of British
Australia up to 1839. The early history, therefore, of New South Wales
is peculiar to itself. Unlike the other mainland provinces, it was at
first held and used chiefly for the reception of British convicts. When
that system was abolished, the social conditions of New South Wales,
Victoria, and South Australia became more equal. Previous to the gold
discoveries of 1851 they may be included, from 1839, in a general
summary view.

  Rise of New South Wales.

The first British governors at Sydney, from 1788, ruled with despotic
power. They were naval or military officers in command of the garrison,
the convicts and the few free settlers. The duty was performed by such
men as Captain Arthur Phillip, Captain Hunter, and others. In the twelve
years' rule of General Macquarie, closing with 1821, the colony made a
substantial advance. By means of bond labour roads and bridges were
constructed, and a route opened into the interior beyond the Blue
Mountains. A population of 30,000, three-fourths of them convicts,
formed the infant commonwealth, whose attention was soon directed to the
profitable trade of rearing fine wool sheep, first commenced by Captain
John McArthur in 1803. During the next ten years, 1821-1831, Sir Thomas
Brisbane and Sir Ralph Darling, two generals of the army, being
successively governors, the colony increased, and eventually succeeded
in obtaining the advantages of a representative institution, by means of
a legislative council. Then came General Sir Richard Bourke, whose wise
and liberal administration proved most beneficial. New South Wales
became prosperous and attractive to emigrants with capital. Its
enterprising ambition was encouraged by taking fresh country north and
south. In the latter direction, explored by Mitchell in 1834 and 1836,
lay Australia Felix, now Victoria, including the well-watered,
thickly-wooded country of Gipps' Land.

  Growth of Victoria.

This district, then called Port Phillip, in the time of Governor Sir
George Gipps, 1838-1846, was growing fast into a position claiming
independence. Melbourne, which began with a few huts on the banks of the
Yarra-Yarra in 1835, was in 1840 a busy town of 6000 inhabitants, the
population of the whole district, with the towns of Geelong and
Portland, reaching 12,850; while its import trade amounted to £204,000,
and its exports to £138,000. Such was the growth of infant Victoria in
five years; that of Adelaide or South Australia, in the same period, was
nearly equal to it. At Melbourne there was a deputy governor, Mr
Latrobe, under Sir George-Gipps at Sydney. Adelaide had its own
governors, first Captain Hindmarsh, next Colonel Gawler, and then
Captain George Grey. Western Australia progressed but slowly, with less
than 4000 inhabitants altogether, under Governors Stirling and Hutt.

  Discovery of gold.

The general advancement of Australia, to the era of the gold-mining, had
been satisfactory, in spite of a severe commercial crisis, from 1841 to
1843, caused by extravagant land speculations and inflated prices.
Victoria produced already more wool than New South Wales, the aggregate
produce of Australia in 1852 being 45,000,000 lb.; and South Australia,
between 1842 and this date, had opened most valuable mines of copper.
The population of New South Wales in 1851 was 190,000; that of Victoria,
77,000; and that of South Australia about the same. At Summerhill Creek,
20 m. north of Bathurst, in the Macquarie plains, gold was discovered,
in February 1851, by Mr E. Hargraves, a gold-miner from California. The
intelligence was made known in April or May; and then began a rush of
thousands,--men leaving their former employments in the bush or in the
towns to search for the ore so greatly coveted in all ages. In August it
was found at Andersen's Creek, near Melbourne; a few weeks later the
great Ballarat gold-field, 80 m. west of that city, was opened; and
after that, Bendigo to the north. Not only in these lucky provinces, New
South Wales and Victoria, where the auriferous deposits were revealed,
but in every British colony of Australasia, all ordinary industry was
left for the one exciting pursuit. The copper mines of South Australia
were for the time deserted, while Tasmania and New Zealand lost many
inhabitants, who emigrated to the more promising country. The
disturbance of social, industrial and commercial affairs, during the
first two or three years of the gold era, was very great. Immigrants
from Europe, and to some extent from North America and China, poured
into Melbourne, where the arrivals in 1852 averaged 2000 persons in a
week. The population of Victoria was doubled in the first twelvemonth of
the gold fever, and the value of imports and exports was multiplied
tenfold between 1851 and 1853. The colony of Victoria was constituted a
separate province in July 1851, Mr Latrobe being appointed governor,
followed by Sir Charles Hotham and Sir Henry Barkly in succession.

  Responsible government.

The separation of the northern part of eastern Australia, under the
name of Queensland, from the original province of New South Wales, took
place in 1859. At that time the district contained about 25,000
inhabitants; and in the first six years its population was quadrupled
and its trade trebled. At the beginning of 1860, when the excitement of
the gold discoveries was wearing off, five of the states had received
from the home government the boon of responsible government, and were in
a position to work out the problem of their position without external
interference; it was not, however, until 1890 that Western Australia was
placed in a similar position. After the establishment of responsible
government the main questions at issue were the secular as opposed to
the religious system of public instruction, protection as opposed to a
revenue tariff, vote by ballot, adult suffrage, abolition of
transportation and assignment of convicts, and free selection of lands
before survey; these, and indeed all the great questions upon which the
country was divided, were settled within twenty years of the granting of
self-government.[6] With the disposal of these important problems,
politics in Australia became a struggle for office between men whose
political principles were very much alike, and the tenure of power
enjoyed by the various governments did not depend upon the principles of
administration so much as upon the personal fitness of the head of the
ministry, and the acceptability of his ministry to the members of the
more popular branch of the legislature.

  General Australian problems.

The two most striking political events in the modern history of
Australia, as a whole, apart from the readiness it has shown to remain a
part of the British empire (q.v.), and to develop along Imperial
lines, are the advent of the Labour party and the establishment of
federation. As regards the last mentioned it may be said that it was
accomplished from within, there being no real external necessity for the
union of the states. Leading politicians have in all the states felt the
cramping effects of mere domestic legislation, albeit on the proper
direction of such legislation depends the well-being of the people; and
to this sense of the limitations of local politics was due, as much as
to anything else, the movement towards federation.

  Agrarian legislation.

Before coming, however, to the history of federation, and the evolution
of the Labour party, we must refer briefly to some other questions which
have been of general interest in Australia. Taking the states as a
whole, agrarian legislation has been the most important subject that has
engrossed the attention of their parliaments, and every state has been
more or less engaged in tinkering with its land laws. The main object of
all such legislation is to secure the residence of the owners on the
land. The object of settlers, however, in a great many, perhaps in the
majority of instances, is to dispose of their holdings as soon as
possible after the requirements of the law have been complied with, and
to avoid permanent settlement. This has greatly facilitated the
formation of large estates devoted chiefly to grazing purposes, contrary
to the policy of the legislature, which has everywhere sought to
encourage tillage, or tillage joined to stock-rearing, and to discourage
large holdings. The importance of the land question is so great that it
is hardly an exaggeration to say that it is usual for every parliament
of Australia to have before it a proposal to alter or amend its land
laws. Since 1870 there have been five radical changes made in New South
Wales. In Victoria the law has been altered five times, and in
Queensland and South Australia seven times.

  Immigration question.

The prevention or regulation of the immigration of coloured races has
also claimed a great share of parliamentary attention. The agitation
against the influx of Chinese commenced very soon after the gold
discoveries, the European miners objecting strongly to the presence of
these aliens upon the diggings. The allegations made concerning the
Chinese really amounted to a charge of undue industry. The Chinese were
hard-working and had the usual fortune attending those who work hard.
They spent little on drink or with the storekeepers, and were,
therefore, by no means popular. As early as 1860 there had been
disturbances of a serious character, and the Chinese were chased off the
goldfields of New South Wales, serious riots occurring at Lambing Flat,
on the Burrangong goldfield. The Chinese difficulty, so far as the
mining population was concerned, was solved by the exhaustion of the
extensive alluvial deposits; the miners' prejudice against the race,
however, still exists, though they are no longer serious competitors,
and the laws of some of the states forbid any Chinese to engage in
mining without the express authority in writing of the minister of
mines. The nearness of China to Australia has always appeared to the
Australian democracy as a menace to the integrity of the white
settlements; and at the many conferences of representatives from the
various states, called to discuss matters of general concern, the
Chinese question has always held a prominent place, but the absence of
any federal authority had made common action difficult. In 1888 the last
important conference on the Chinese question was held in Sydney and
attended by delegates from all the states. Previously to the meeting of
the conference there had been a great deal of discussion in regard to
the influx of Chinese, and such influx was on all sides agreed to be a
growing danger. The conference, therefore, merely expressed the public
sentiment when it resolved that, although it was not advisable to
prohibit altogether this class of immigration, it was necessary in the
public interests that the number of Chinese privileged to land should be
so limited as to prevent the people of that race from ever becoming an
important element in the community. In conformity with this
determination the various state legislatures enacted new laws or amended
the existing laws to cope with the difficulty; these remained until they
were in effect superseded by Commonwealth legislation. The objection to
admitting immigrants was not only to the Chinese, but extended to all
Asiatics; but as a large proportion of the persons whose entrance into
the colonies it was desired to stop were British subjects, and the
Imperial government refused to sanction any measure directly prohibiting
in plain terms the movement of British subjects from one part of the
empire to another, resort was made to indirect legislation; this was the
more advisable, as the rise of the Japanese power in the East and the
alliance of that country with Great Britain rendered it necessary to pay
attention to the susceptibilities of a powerful nation whose subjects
might be affected by restrictive laws. Eventually the difficulty was
overcome by the device of an educational test based on the provisions of
an act in operation in Natal. It was provided that a person was to be
prohibited from landing in Australia who failed to write in any
prescribed language fifty words dictated to him by the commonwealth
officer supervising immigration. The efficacy of this legislation is in
its administration, the language in which coloured aliens are usually
tested being European. The agitation against the Chinese covered a space
of over fifty years, a long period in the history of a young country,
and was promoted and kept alive almost entirely by the trades unions,
and the restriction acts were the first legislative triumph of the
Labour party, albeit that party was not at the time directly represented
in parliament.

  Bank crisis of 1893.

One of the most notable events in the modern history of Australia
occurred shortly after the great strike of 1890. This was what is
ordinarily termed the bank crisis of 1893. Although this crisis followed
on the great strike, the crisis of two things had no real connexion, the
crisis being the natural result of events long anterior to 1890. The
effects of the crisis were mainly felt in the three eastern states,
Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia
being affected chiefly by reason of the fact of their intimate financial
connexion with the eastern states. The approach of the crisis was
heralded by many signs. Deposits were shifted from bank to bank, there
were small runs on several of the savings banks guaranteed by the
government, mortgagees required additional security from their debtors,
bankruptcies became frequent, and some of the banks began to accumulate
gold against the evil day. The building societies and financial
institutions in receipt of deposits, or so many of them as were on an
unsound footing, failed at an early period of the depression, so also
did the weaker banks. There was distrust in the minds of the depositors,
especially those whose holdings were small, and most of the banks were,
at a very early period, subjected to the strain of repaying a large
proportion of their deposits as they fell due. For a time the money so
withdrawn was hoarded, but after a while it found its way back again
into the banks. The crisis was by no means a sudden crash, and even when
the failures began to take place they were spread over a period of
sixteen weeks.

The first noticeable effect of the crisis was a great scarcity of
employment. Much capital was locked up in the failed banks, and was
therefore not available for distribution amongst wage-earners. Wages
fell precipitately, as also did rents. There was an almost entire
cessation of building, and a large number of houses in the chief cities
remained untenanted, the occupants moving to lodgings and more than one
family living in a single house. Credit became greatly restricted, and
all descriptions of speculative enterprise came to an end. The consuming
power of the population was greatly diminished, and in the year
following the crisis the imports into Australia from abroad diminished
by four and three-quarter millions. In fact, everywhere the demand for
goods, especially of those for domestic consumption, fell away; and
there was a reduction in the average number of persons employed in the
manufacturing industries to the extent of more than 20%. The lack of
employment in factories naturally affected the coal mining industry, and
indeed every industry in the states, except those connected with the
export trade, was severely affected. During the crisis banks having a
paid-up capital and reserves of £5,000,000 and deposits of £53,000,000
closed their doors. Most of these, however, reopened for business before
many weeks. The crisis was felt in the large cities more keenly than in
the country districts, and in Melbourne more severely than in any other
capital. The change of fortune proved disastrous to many families,
previously to all appearances in opulent circumstances, but by all
classes alike their reverses were borne with the greatest bravery. In
its ultimate effects the crisis was by no means evil. Its true meaning
was not lost upon a business community that had had twenty years of
almost unchecked prosperity. It required the chastening of adversity to
teach it a salutary lesson, and a few years after, when the first
effects of the crisis had passed away, business was on a much sounder
footing than had been the case for very many years. One of the first
results was to put trade on a sound basis and to abolish most of the
abuses of the credit system, but the most striking effect of the crisis
was the attention which was almost immediately directed to productive
pursuits. Agriculture everywhere expanded, the mining industry revived,
and, if it had not been for the low prices of staple products, the
visible effects of the crisis would have passed away within a very few
years.

  Drought of 1902.

Another matter which deserves attention was the great drought which
culminated in the year 1902. For some years previously the pastoral
industry had been declining and the number of sheep and cattle in
Australia had greatly diminished, but the year 1902 was one of veritable
drought. The failure of the crops was almost universal and large numbers
of sheep and cattle perished for want of food. The truth is,
pastoralists for the most part carried on their industry trusting very
greatly to luck, not making any special provisions against the
vicissitudes of the seasons. Enormous quantities of natural hay were
allowed every year to rot or be destroyed by bush fires, and the
bountiful provision made by nature to carry them over the seasons of dry
weather absolutely neglected; so that when the destructive season of
1902 fell upon them, over a large area of territory there was no food
for the stock. The year 1903 proved most bountiful, and in a few years
all trace of the disastrous drought of 1902 passed away. But beyond this
the pastoralist learnt most effectually the lesson that, in a country
like Australia, provision must be made for the occasional season when
the rainfall is entirely inadequate to the wants of the farmer and the
pastoralist.

  Federation.

The question of federation was not lost sight of by the framers of the
original constitution which was bestowed upon New South Wales. In the
report of the committee of the legislative council appointed in 1852 to
prepare a constitution for that colony, the following passage
occurs:--"One of the most prominent legislative measures required by the
colony, and the colonies of the Australian group generally, is the
establishment at once of a general assembly, to make laws in relation to
those intercolonial questions that have arisen or may hereafter arise
among them. The questions which would claim the exercise of such a
jurisdiction appear to be (1) intercolonial tariffs and the coasting
trade; (2) railways, roads, canals, and other such works running through
any two of the colonies; (3) beacons and lighthouses on the coast; (4)
intercolonial gold regulations; (5) postage between the said colonies;
(6) a general court of appeal from the courts of such colonies; (7) a
power to legislate on all other subjects which may be submitted to them
by addresses from the legislative councils and assemblies of the
colonies, and to appropriate to any of the above-mentioned objects the
necessary sums of money, to be raised by a percentage on the revenues of
all the colonies interested." This wise recommendation received very
scant attention, and it was not until the necessities of the colonies
forced them to it that an attempt was made to do what the framers of the
original constitution suggested. Federation at no time actually dropped
out of sight, but it was not until thirty-five years later that any
practical steps were taken towards its accomplishment. Meanwhile a sort
of makeshift was devised, and the Imperial parliament passed a measure
permitting the formation of a federal council, to which any colony that
felt inclined to join could send delegates. Of the seven colonies New
South Wales and New Zealand stood aloof from the council, and from the
beginning it was therefore shorn of a large share of the prestige that
would have attached to a body speaking and acting on behalf of a united
Australia. The council had also a fatal defect in its constitution. It
was merely a deliberative body, having no executive functions and
possessing no control of funds or other means to put its legislation in
force. Its existence was well-nigh forgotten by the people of Australia
until the occurrence of its biennial meetings, and even then but slight
interest was taken in its proceedings. The council held eight meetings,
at which many matters of intercolonial interest were discussed. The last
occasion of its being called together was in 1899, when the council met
in Melbourne. In 1889 an important step towards federation was taken by
Sir Henry Parkes. The occasion was the report of Major-General Edwards
on the defences of Australia, and Sir Henry addressed the other premiers
on the desirability of a federal union for purposes of defence. The
immediate result was a conference at Parliament House, Melbourne, of
representatives from each of the seven colonies. This conference adopted
an address to the queen expressing its loyalty and attachment, and
submitting certain resolutions which affirmed the desirability of an
early union, under the crown, of the Australasian colonies, on
principles just to all, and provided that the remoter Australasian
colonies should be entitled to admission upon terms to be afterwards
agreed upon, and that steps should be taken for the appointment of
delegates to a national Australasian convention, to consider and report
upon an adequate scheme for a federal convention. In accordance with the
understanding arrived at, the various Australasian parliaments appointed
delegates to attend a national convention to be held in Sydney, and on
the 2nd March 1891 the convention held its first meeting. Sir Henry
Parkes was elected president, and he moved a series of resolutions
embodying the principles necessary to establish, on an enduring
foundation, the structure of a federal government. These resolutions
were slightly altered by the conference, and were adopted in the
following form:--

  1. The powers and rights of existing colonies to remain intact, except
  as regards such powers as it may be necessary to hand over to the
  Federal government.

  2. No alteration to be made in states without the consent of the
  legislatures of such states, as well as of the federal parliament.

  3. Trade between the federated colonies to be absolutely free.

  4. Power to impose customs and excise duties to be in the Federal
  government and parliament.

  5. Military and naval defence forces to be under one command.

  6. The federal constitution to make provision to enable each state to
  make amendments in the constitution if necessary for the purposes of
  federation.

Other formal resolutions were also agreed to, and on the 31st of March
Sir Samuel Griffith, as chairman of the committee on constitutional
machinery, brought up a draft Constitution Bill, which was carefully
considered by the convention in committee of the whole and adopted on
the 9th of April, when the convention was formally dissolved. The bill,
however, fell absolutely dead, not because it was not a good bill, but
because the movement out of which it arose had not popular initiative,
and therefore failed to reach the popular imagination.

Although the bill drawn up by the convention of 1891 was not received by
the people with any show of interest, the federation movement did not
die out; on the contrary, it had many enthusiastic advocates, especially
in the colony of Victoria. In 1894 an unofficial convention was held at
Corowa, at which the cause of federation was strenuously advocated, but
it was not until 1895 that the movement obtained new life, by reason of
the proposals adopted at a meeting of premiers convened by Mr G.H. Reid
of New South Wales. At this meeting all the colonies except New Zealand
were represented, and it was agreed that the parliament of each colony
should be asked to pass a bill enabling the people to choose ten persons
to represent the colony on a federal convention; the work of such
convention being the framing of a federal constitution to be submitted
to the people for approval by means of the referendum. During the year
1896 Enabling Acts were passed by New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania,
South Australia and Western Australia, and delegates were elected by
popular vote in all the colonies named except Western Australia, where
the delegates were chosen by parliament. The convention met in Adelaide
on the 22nd of March 1897, and, after drafting a bill for the
consideration of the various parliaments, adjourned until the 2nd of
September. On that date the delegates reassembled in Sydney, and debated
the bill in the light of the suggestions made by the legislatures of the
federating colonies. In the course of the proceedings it was announced
that Queensland desired to come within the proposed union; and in view
of this development, and in order to give further opportunity for the
consideration of the bill, the convention again adjourned. The third and
final session was opened in Melbourne on the 20th of January 1898, but
Queensland was still unrepresented; and, after further consideration,
the draft bill was finally adopted on the 16th of March and remitted to
the various colonies for submission to the people.

The constitution was accepted by Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania
by popular acclamation, but in New South Wales very great opposition was
shown, the main points of objection being the financial provisions,
equal representation in the Senate, and the difficulty in the way of the
larger states securing an amendment of the constitution in the event of
a conflict with the smaller states. As far as the other colonies were
concerned, it was evident that the bill was safe, and public attention
throughout Australia was fixed on New South Wales, where a fierce
political contest was raging, which it was recognized would decide the
fate of the measure for the time being. The fear was as to whether the
statutory number of 80,000 votes necessary for the acceptance of the
bill would be reached. This fear proved to be well founded, for the
result of the referendum in New South Wales showed 71,595 votes in
favour of the bill and 66,228 against it, and it was accordingly lost.
In Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia, on the other hand, the bill
was accepted by triumphant majorities. Western Australia did not put it
to the vote, as the Enabling Act of that colony only provided for
joining a federation of which New South Wales should form a part. The
existence of such a strong opposition to the bill in the mother colony
convinced even its most zealous advocates that some changes would have
to be made in the constitution before it could be accepted by the
people; consequently, although the general election in New South Wales,
held six or seven weeks later, was fought on the federal issue, yet the
opposing parties seemed to occupy somewhat the same ground, and the
question narrowed itself down to one as to which party should be
entrusted with the negotiations to be conducted on behalf of the colony,
with a view to securing a modification of the objectionable features of
the bill. The new parliament decided to adopt the procedure of again
sending the premier, Mr Reid, into conference, armed with a series of
resolutions affirming its desire to bring about the completion of
federal union, but asking the other colonies to agree to the
reconsideration of the provisions which were most generally objected to
in New South Wales. The other colonies interested were anxious to bring
the matter to a speedy termination, and readily agreed to this course of
procedure. Accordingly a premiers' conference was held in Melbourne at
the end of January 1899, at which Queensland was for the first time
represented. At this conference a compromise was effected, something was
conceded to the claims of New South Wales, but the main principles of
the bill remained intact. The bill as amended was submitted to the
electors of each colony and again triumphantly carried in Victoria,
South Australia and Tasmania. In New South Wales and Queensland there
were still a large number of persons opposed to the measure, which was
nevertheless carried in both colonies. New South Wales having decided in
favour of federation, the way was clear for a decision on the part of
Western Australia. The Enabling Bill passed the various stages in the
parliament of that colony, and the question was then adopted by
referendum.

In accordance with this general verdict of all the states, the colonial
draft bill was submitted to the imperial government for legislation as
an imperial act; and six delegates were sent to England to explain the
measure and to pilot it through the cabinet and parliament. A bill was
presented to the British parliament which embodied and established, with
such variations as had been accepted on behalf of Australia by the
delegates, the constitution agreed to at the premiers' conference of
1899 and speedily became law. Under this act, which was dated the 9th of
July 1900, a proclamation was issued on the 17th of September of the
same year, declaring that, on and after the 1st of January 1901, the
people of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland,
Tasmania and Western Australia should be united in a federal
commonwealth under the name of the Commonwealth of Australia.

    Provisions of the Act of 1900.

  The six colonies entering the Commonwealth were denominated original
  states, and new states might be admitted, or might be formed by
  separation from or union of two or more states or parts of states; and
  territories (as distinguished from states) might be taken over and
  governed under the legislative power of the Commonwealth. The
  legislative power is vested in a federal parliament, consisting of the
  sovereign, a senate, and a house of representatives, the sovereign
  being represented by a governor-general. The Senate was to consist of
  the same number of members (not less than six) for each state, the
  term of service being six years, but subject to an arrangement that
  half the number would retire every three years. The House of
  Representatives was to consist of members chosen in the different
  states in numbers proportioned to their population, but never fewer
  than five. The first House of Representatives was to contain
  seventy-five members. For elections to the Senate the governors of
  states, and for general elections of the House of Representatives the
  governor-general, would cause writs to be issued. The Senate would
  choose its own president, and the House of Representatives its
  speaker; each house would make its own rules of procedure; in each,
  one-third of the number of members would form a quorum; the members of
  each must take oath, or make affirmation of allegiance; and all alike
  would receive an allowance of £400 a year. The legislative powers of
  the parliament have a wide range, many matters being transferred to it
  from the colonial parliaments. The more important subjects with which
  it deals are trade, shipping and railways; taxation, bounties, the
  borrowing of money on the credit of the Commonwealth; the postal and
  telegraphic services; defence, census and statistics; currency,
  coinage, banking, bankruptcy; weights and measures; copyright, patents
  and trade marks; marriage and divorce; immigration and emigration;
  conciliation and arbitration in industrial disputes. Bills imposing
  taxation or appropriating revenue must not originate in the Senate,
  and neither taxation bills nor bills appropriating revenue for the
  annual service of the government may be amended in the Senate, but the
  Senate may return such bills to the House of Representatives with a
  request for their amendment. Appropriation laws must not deal with
  other matters. Taxation laws must deal with only one subject of
  taxation; but customs and excise duties may, respectively, be dealt
  with together. Votes for the appropriation of the revenue shall not
  pass unless recommended by the governor-general. The constitution
  provides means for the settlement of disputes between the houses, and
  requires the assent of the sovereign to all laws. The executive power
  is vested in the governor-general, assisted by an executive council
  appointed by himself. He has command of the army and navy, and
  appoints federal ministers and judges. The ministers are members of
  the executive council, and must be, or within three months of their
  appointment must become, members of the parliament. The judicial
  powers are vested in a high court and other federal courts, and the
  federal judges hold office for life or during good behaviour. The High
  Court has appellate jurisdiction in cases from other federal courts
  and from the supreme courts of the states, and it has original
  jurisdiction in matters arising under laws made by the federal
  parliament, in disputes between states, or residents in different
  states, and in matters affecting the representatives of foreign
  powers. Special provisions were made respecting appeals from the High
  Court to the sovereign in council. The constitution set forth
  elaborate arrangements for the administration of finance and trade
  during the transition period following the transference of departments
  to the Commonwealth. Within two years uniform customs duties were to
  be imposed; thereafter the parliament of the Commonwealth had
  exclusive power to impose customs and excise duties, or to grant
  bounties; and trade within the Commonwealth was to be absolutely free.
  Exceptions were made permitting the states to grant bounties on mining
  and (with the consent of the parliament) on exports of produce or
  manufactures--Western Australia being for a time partially exempted
  from the prohibition to impose import duties.

  The constitution, parliament and laws of each state, subject to the
  federal constitution, retained their authority; state rights were
  carefully safeguarded, and an inter-state commission was given powers
  of adjudication and of administration of the laws relating to trade,
  transport and other matters. Provision was made for necessary
  alteration of the constitution of the Commonwealth, but so that no
  alteration could be effected unless the question had been directly
  submitted to, and the change accepted by the electorate in the states.
  The seat of government was to be within New South Wales, not less than
  100 m. distant from Sydney, and of an area not less than 100 sq. m.
  Until other provision was made, the governor-general was to have a
  salary of £10,000, paid by the Commonwealth. Respecting the salaries
  of the governors of states, the constitution made no provision.

The choice of governor-general of the new Commonwealth fell upon Lord
Hopetoun (afterwards Lord Linlithgow), who had won golden opinions as
governor of Victoria a few years before; Mr (afterwards Sir Edmund)
Barton, who had taken the lead among the Australian delegates, became
first prime minister; and the Commonwealth was inaugurated at the
opening of 1901. The first parliament under the constitution was elected
on the 29th and 30th of March 1901, and was opened by the prince of
Wales on the 9th of May following. In October 1908 the Yass-Canberra
district, near the town of Yass, N.S.W., was at length selected by both
federal houses to contain the future federal capital.

  Labour movement.

  The Great Strike of 1890.

The Labour movement in Australia may be traced back to the early days
when transportation was in vogue, and the free immigrant and the
time-expired convict objected to the competition of the bond labourer.
The great object of these early struggles being attained, Labour
directed its attention mainly to securing shorter hours. It was aided
very materially by the dearth of workers consequent on the gold
discoveries, when every man could command his own price. When the
excitement consequent on the gold finds had subsided, there was a
considerable reaction against the claims of Labour, and this was greatly
helped by the congested state of the labour market; but the principle of
an eight-hours day made progress, and was conceded in several trades. In
the early years of the 'seventies the colonies entered upon an era of
well-being, and for about twelve years every man, willing to work and
capable of exerting himself, readily found employment. The Labour unions
were able to secure in these years many concessions both as to hours and
wages. In 1873 there was an important rise in wages, in the following
year there was a further advance, and another in 1876; but in 1877 wages
fell back a little, though not below the rate of 1874. In 1882 there was
a very important advance in wages; carpenters received 11s. a day,
bricklayers 12s. 6d., stone-masons 11s. 6d., plasterers 12s., painters
11s., blacksmiths 10s., and navvies and general labourers 8s., and work
was very plentiful. For five years these high wages ruled; but in 1886
there was a sharp fall, though wages still remained very good. In 1888
there was an advance, and again in 1889. In 1890 matters were on the eve
of a great change and wages fell, in most cases to a point 20% below the
rates of 1885. During the whole period from 1873 onwards, prices, other
than of labour, were steadily tending downwards, so that the cost of
living in 1890 was much below that of 1873. Taking everything into
consideration the reduction was, perhaps, not less than 20%, so that,
though the nominal or money wages in 1873 and 1890 were the same, the
actual wages were much higher in the latter year. Much of the
improvement in the lot of the wage-earners has been due to the Labour
organizations, yet so late as 1881 these organizations were of so little
account, politically, that when the law relating to trades unions was
passed in New South Wales, the English law was followed, and it was
simply enacted that the purposes of any trades union shall not be deemed
unlawful (so as to render a member liable to criminal prosecution for
conspiracy or otherwise) merely by reason that they are in restraint of
trade. After the year 1884 Labour troubles became very frequent, the New
South Wales coal miners in particular being at war with the colliery
owners during the greater part of the six years intervening between then
and what is called the Great Strike. The strong downward tendency of
prices made a reduction of wages imperative; but the labouring classes
failed to recognize any such necessity, and strongly resented any
reductions proposed by employers. It was hard indeed for a carter
drawing coal to a gasworks to recognize the necessity which compelled a
reduction in his wages because wool had fallen 20%. Nor were other
labourers, more nearly connected with the producing interests, satisfied
with a reduction of wages because produce had fallen in price all round.
Up to 1889 wages held their ground, although work had become more
difficult to obtain, and some industries were being carried on without
any profit. It was at such an inopportune time that the most extensive
combination of Labour yet brought into action against capital formulated
its demands. It is possible that the London dockers' strike was not
without its influence on the minds of the Australian Labour leaders.
That strike had been liberally helped by the Australian unions, and it
was confidently predicted that, as the Australian workers were more
effectively organized than the English unions, a corresponding success
would result from their course of action. A strike of the Newcastle
miners, after lasting twenty-nine weeks, came to an end in January 1890,
and throughout the rest of the year there was great unrest in Labour
circles. On the 6th of September the silver mines closed down, and a
week later a conference of employers issued a manifesto which was met
next day by a counter-manifesto of the Intercolonial Labour Conference,
and almost immediately afterwards by the calling out of 40,000 men. The
time chosen for the strike was the height of the wool season, when a
cessation of work would be attended with the maximum of inconvenience.
Sydney was the centre of the disturbance, and the city was in a state of
industrial siege, feeling running to dangerous extremes. Riotous scenes
occurred both in Sydney and on the coal-fields, and a large number of
special constables were sworn in by the government. Towards the end of
October 20,000 shearers were called out, and many other trades,
principally concerned with the handling or shipping of wool, joined the
ranks of the strikers, with the result that the maritime and pastoral
industries throughout the whole of Australia were most injuriously
disturbed. The Great Strike terminated early in November 1890, the
employers gaining a decisive victory. The colonies were, however, to
have other and bitter experiences of strikes before Labour recognized
that of all means for settling industrial disputes strikes are, on the
whole, the most disastrous that it can adopt. The strikes of the years
1890 and 1892 are just as important on account of their political
consequences as from the direct gains or losses involved.

  Political consequences.

As one result of the strike of 1890 a movement was set afoot by a number
of enthusiasts, more visionary than practical, that has resulted in a
measure of more or less disaster. This was the planting of a colony of
communistic Australians in South America. After much negotiation the
leader, Mr William Lane, a Brisbane journalist, decided on Paraguay, and
he tramped across the continent, preaching a new crusade, and gathering
in funds and recruits in his progress. On the 16th of July 1893 the
first little army of "New Australians" left Sydney in the "Royal Tar,"
which arrived at Montevideo on the 31st of August. Other consignments of
intending settlers in "New Australia" followed; but though the
settlement is still in existence it has completely failed to realize the
impracticable ideals of its original members. The Queensland government
assisted some of the disillusioned to escape from the paradise which
proved a prison; some managed to get away on their own account; and
those that have remained have split into as many settlements almost as
there are settlers. Another effect of the Great Strike was in a more
practical direction. New South Wales was the first country which
endeavoured to settle its labour grievances through the ballot-box and
to send a great party to parliament as the direct representation of
Labour, pledged to obtain through legislation what it was unable to
obtain by strikes and physical force. The principle of one-man one-vote
had been persistently advocated without arousing any special
parliamentary or public enthusiasm until the meeting of the Federal
Convention in 1891. The convention was attended by Sir George Grey, who
was publicly welcomed to the colony by New Zealanders resident in
Sydney, and by other admirers, and his reception was an absolute
ovation. He eloquently and persistently advocated the principle of
one-man one-vote as the bed-rock of all democratic reform. This
subsequently formed the first plank of the Labour platform. Several
attempts had been made by individuals belonging to the Labour party to
enter the New South Wales parliament, but it was not until 1891 that the
occurrence of a general election gave the party the looked-for
opportunity for concerted action. The results of the election came as a
complete surprise to the majority of the community. The Labour party
captured 35 seats out of a House of 125 members; and as the old parties
almost equally divided the remaining seats, and a fusion was impossible,
the Labour representatives dominated the situation. It was not long,
however, before the party itself became divided on the fiscal question;
and a Protectionist government coming into power, about half the Labour
members gave it consistent support and enabled it to maintain office for
about three years, the party as a political unit being thus destroyed.
The events of these three years taught the Labour leaders that a
parliamentary party was of little practical influence unless it was able
to cast on all important occasions a solid vote, and to meet the case a
new method was devised. The party therefore determined that they would
refuse to support any person standing in the Labour interests who
refused to pledge himself to vote on all occasions in such way as the
majority of the party might decide to be expedient. This was called the
"solidarity pledge," and, united under its sanction, what was left of
the Labour party contested the general election of 1894. The result was
a defeat, their numbers being reduced from 35 to 19; but a signal
triumph was won for solidarity. Very few of the members who refused to
take the pledge were returned and the adherents of the united party were
able to accomplish more with their reduced number than under the old
conditions.

  The two features of the Labour party in New South Wales are its
  detachment from other parties and the control of the caucus. The
  caucus, which is the natural corollary of the detachment, determines
  by majority the vote of the whole of the members of the party,
  independence of action being allowed on minor questions only. So far
  the party has refrained from formal alliance with the other great
  parties of the state. It supports the government as the power alone
  capable of promoting legislation, but its support is given only so
  long as the measures of the government are consistent with the Labour
  policy. This position the Labour party has been able to maintain with
  great success, owing to the circumstance that the other parties have
  been almost equally balanced.

  Parliamentary Labour party.

The movement towards forming a parliamentary Labour party was not
confined to New South Wales; on the contrary, it was common to all the
states, having its origin in the failure of the Great Strike of 1890.
The experience of the party was also much the same as in New South
Wales, but its greatest triumphs were achieved in South Australia. The
Labour party has been in power in Queensland, Western Australia and
South Australia, and has, on many occasions, decided the fate of the
government on a critical division in all the states except Tasmania and
Victoria. Different ideals dominate the party in the different states.
The one ideal which has just been described represents the Labour party
from the New South Wales standpoint. The only qualification worth
mentioning is the signing of the pledge of solidarity. The other ideal,
typified by the South Australian party, differs from this in one
important respect. To the Labour party in that state are admitted only
persons who have worked for their living at manual labour, and this
qualification of being an actual worker is one that was strongly
insisted upon at the formation of the party and strictly adhered to,
although the temptation to break away from it and accept as candidates
persons of superior education and position has been very great. On the
formation of the Commonwealth a Labour party was established in the
federal houses. It comprises one-third of the representation in the
House of Representatives, and perhaps a still larger proportion in the
Senate. The party is, however, formed on a broader basis than the state
parties, the solidarity pledge extends only to votes upon which the fate
of a government depends. Naturally, however, as the ideals of the
members of the party are the same, the members of the Labour party will
be generally found voting together on all important divisions, the chief
exception being with regard to free trade or protection. The Labour
party held power in the Commonwealth for a short period, and has had the
balance of power in its hands ever since the formation of the
Commonwealth. (T. A. C.)

  Recent legislation.

Australian legislation in the closing years of the 19th century and the
first decade of the 20th bore the most evident traces of the Labour
party's influence. In all the colonies a complete departure from
principles laid down by the leading political economists of the 19th
century was made when acts were passed subjecting every branch of
domestic industry to the control of specially constituted tribunals,
which were empowered among other important functions to fix the minimum
rate of wages to be paid to all grades of workmen. (See also the
articles ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION; TRADE UNIONS; LABOUR
LEGISLATION.)

    Victoria.

  Victoria was the pioneer in factory legislation, the first Victorian
  act of that character dating from 1873. In 1884 a royal commission,
  appointed two years earlier to inquire into the conditions of
  employment in the colony and certain allegations of "sweating" that
  had then recently been made, reported that:--"The most effective mode
  of bringing about industrial co-operation and mutual sympathy between
  employers and employed, and thus obviating labour conflicts in the
  future, is by the establishment of courts of conciliation in Victoria,
  whose procedure and awards shall have the sanction and authority of
  law." This report led to the passing of a number of acts which,
  proving ineffectual, were followed by the Factories and Shops Act of
  1896, passed by the ministry of Mr (afterwards Sir Alexander) Peacock.
  This measure, together with several subsequent amending acts, of which
  the most important became law in 1903, 1905 and 1907, forms a complete
  industrial code in which the principle of state regulation of wages is
  recognized and established. Its central enactment was to bring into
  existence (1) "Special Boards," consisting of an equal number of
  representatives of employers and workmen respectively in any trade,
  under the presidency of an independent chairman, and (2) a Court of
  Industrial Appeals. A special board may be formed at the request of
  any union of employers or of workmen, or on the initiative of the
  Labour department. After hearing evidence, which may be given on oath,
  the special board issues a "determination," fixing the minimum rate of
  wages to be paid to various classes of workers of both sexes and
  different ages in the trade covered by the determination, including
  apprentices; and specifying the number of hours per week for which
  such wages are payable, with the rates for overtime when those hours
  are exceeded. The determination is then gazetted, and it becomes
  operative over a specified area, which varies in different cases, on a
  date fixed by the board. Either party, or the minister for Labour, may
  refer a determination to the court of industrial appeals, and the
  court, in the event of a special board failing to make a
  determination, may itself be called upon to frame one. The general
  administration of the Factories and Shops Acts, to which the special
  boards owe their being, is vested in a chief inspector of factories,
  subject to the control of the minister of Labour in matters of policy.
  Before the end of 1906 fifty-two separate trades in Victoria had
  obtained special boards, by whose determinations their operations were
  controlled.

    South Australia.

  A similar system was introduced into South Australia by an act passed
  in 1900 amending the Factory Act of 1894, which was the first
  legislation of the sort passed in that state.

    Queensland.

  In Queensland, where the earliest factory legislation dates from 1896,
  keen parliamentary conflict raged round the proposal in 1907 to
  introduce the special boards system for fixing wages. More than one
  change of government occurred before the bill became law in April
  1908.

    New South Wales.

  In New South Wales, whose example was followed by Western Australia,
  the machinery adopted for fixing the statutory rate of wages was of a
  somewhat different type. The model followed in these two states was
  not Victoria but New Zealand, where an Industrial Conciliation and
  Arbitration Act was passed in 1894. A similar measure, under the
  guidance of the attorney-general, the Hon. B.R. Wise, was carried
  after much opposition in New South Wales in 1901, to remain in force
  till the 30th of June 1908. By it an arbitration court was instituted,
  consisting of a president and assessors representing the employers'
  unions and the workers' unions respectively; in any trade in which a
  dispute occurs, any union of workmen or employers registered under the
  act was given the right to bring the matter before the arbitration
  court, and if the court makes an award, an application may be made to
  it to make the award a "common rule," which thereupon becomes binding
  over the trade affected, wherever the act applies. The award of the
  court is thus the equivalent of the determination of a special board
  in Victoria, and deals with the same questions, the most important of
  which are the minimum rates of wages and the number of working hours
  per week. The act contained stringent provisions forbidding strikes;
  but in this respect it failed to effect its purpose, several strikes
  occurring in the years following its enactment, in which there were
  direct refusals to obey awards.

    Western Australia.

  In the years 1900 and 1902 acts were passed in Western Australia still
  more closely modelled on the New Zealand act than was the
  above-mentioned statute in New South Wales. Unlike the latter, they
  reproduced the institution of district conciliation boards in addition
  to the arbitration court; but these boards were a failure here as they
  were in New Zealand, and after 1903 they fell into disuse. In Western
  Australia, too, the act failed to prevent strikes taking place. In
  1907 a serious strike occurred in the timber trade, attended by all
  the usual accompaniments, except actual disorder, of an industrial
  conflict.

    Federal Arbitration Act of 1904.

  In all this legislation one of the most hotly contested points was
  whether the arbitration court should be given power to lay it down
  that workers who were members of a trade union should be employed in
  preference to non-unionists. This power was given to the tribunal in
  New South Wales, but was withheld in Western Australia. It was the
  same question that formed the chief subject of debate over the Federal
  Conciliation and Arbitration Act, which, after causing the defeat of
  more than one ministry, passed through the Commonwealth parliament in
  1904. It was eventually compromised by giving the power, but only with
  safeguarding conditions, to the Federal arbitration court. This
  tribunal differs from similar courts in the states inasmuch as it
  consists of a single member, called the "president," an officer
  appointed by the governor-general from among the justices of the High
  Court of Australia. The president has the power to appoint assessors
  to advise him on technical points; and considerable powers of
  devolution of authority for the purpose of inquiry and report are
  conferred upon the court, the main object of which is to secure
  settlement by conciliatory methods. The distinctive object of the
  Federal Act, as defined in the measure itself, is to provide machinery
  for dealing with industrial disputes extending beyond any one state,
  examples of which were furnished by the first two important cases
  submitted to the court--the one concerning the merchant marine of
  Australia, and the other the sheep shearers, both of which were heard
  in 1907. An additional duty was thrown on the Federal arbitration
  court by the Customs and Excise Tariff Acts of 1906, in which were
  embodied the principles known as the "New Protection." By the Customs
  Act the duty was raised on imported agricultural implements, while as
  a safeguard to the consumer the maximum prices for the retail of the
  goods were fixed. In order to provide a similar protection for the
  artisans employed in the protected industries, an excise duty was
  imposed on the home-produced articles, which was to be remitted in
  favour of manufacturers who could show that they paid "fair and
  reasonable" wages, and complied with certain other conditions for the
  benefit of their workmen. The chief authority for determining whether
  these conditions are satisfied or not is the Federal arbitration
  court.

    Old age pensions.

  The same period that saw this legislation adopted was also marked by
  the establishment of old age pensions in the three eastern states, and
  also in the Commonwealth. By the Federal Act, passed in the session of
  1908, a pension of ten shillings a week was granted to persons of
  either sex over sixty-five years of age, or to persons over sixty who
  are incapacitated from earning a living. The Commonwealth legislation
  thus made provision for the aged poor in the three states which up to
  1908 had not accepted the principle of old age pensions, and also for
  those who, owing to their having resided in more than one state, were
  debarred from receiving pension in any.

  Tariff.

An important work of the Commonwealth parliament was the passing of a
uniform tariff to supersede the six separate tariffs in force at the
establishment of the Commonwealth, but many other important measures
were considered and some passed into law. During the first six years of
federation there were five ministries; the tenure of office under the
three-yearly system was naturally uncertain, and this uncertainty was
reflected in the proposals of whatever ministry was in office. The great
task of adjusting the financial business of the Commonwealth on a
permanent basis was one of very great difficulty, as the apparent
interests of the states and of the Commonwealth were opposed. Up till
1908 it had been generally assumed that the constitution required the
treasurer of the Commonwealth to hand over to the states month by month
whatever surplus funds remained in his hands. But in July 1908 a Surplus
Revenue Act was passed which was based on a different interpretation of
the constitution. Under this act the appropriation of these surplus
funds to certain trust purposes in the Federal treasury is held to be
equivalent to payment to the states. The money thus obtained was
appropriated in part to naval defence and harbours, and in part to the
provision of old age pensions under the Federal Old Age Pension Act of
1908. The act was strongly opposed by the government of Queensland, and
the question was raised as to whether it was based on a true
interpretation of the constitution. The chief external interest,
however, of the new financial policy of the Commonwealth lay in its
relation towards the empire as a whole. At the Imperial Conference in
London in 1907 Mr Deakin, the Commonwealth premier, was the leading
advocate of colonial preference with a view to imperial commercial
union; and though no reciprocal arrangement was favoured by the Liberal
cabinet, who temporarily spoke for the United Kingdom, the colonial
representatives were all agreed in urging such a policy, and found the
Opposition (the Unionist party) in England prepared to adopt it as part
of Mr Chamberlain's tariff reform movement. In spite of the official
rebuff received from the mother-country, the Australian ministry, in
drawing up the new Federal tariff, gave a substantial preference to
British imports, and thus showed their willingness to go farther. (See
the article BRITISH EMPIRE.)     (R. J. M.)

  GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.--For Physical Geography: Barton, _Australian
  Physiography_ (Brisbane, 1895); Wall, _Physical Geography of
  Australia_ (Melbourne, 1883); Taylor, _Geography of New South Wales_
  (Sydney, 1898); Saville Kent, _The Great Barrier Reef of Australia_
  (London, 1893); A. Agassiz, _Visit to the Barrier Reef_ (Cambridge,
  Mass., 1899); J.P. Thomson, _The Physical Geography of Australia_
  (Smithsonian Report, Washington, 1898); J.W. Gregory, _The Dead Heart
  of Australia_. For Flora: Maiden, _Useful Native Plants of Australia_
  (Sydney, 1889); Bentham and Mueller, _Flora Australiensis_ (London,
  1863-1878); Fitzgerald, _Australian Orchids_ (Sydney, 1870-1890);
  Mueller, _Census of Australian Plants_ (Melbourne, 1889). For Fauna:
  Forbes, "The Chatham Islands; their Relation to a former Southern
  Continent," _Geographical Journal_, vol. ii. (1893); Hedley,
  "Surviving Refugees in Austral Lands of Ancient Antarctic Life,"
  _Royal Society N.S. Wales_, 1895; "The Relation of the Fauna and Flora
  of Australia to those of New Zealand," _Nat. Science_ (1893);
  Tenison-Woods, _The Fish and Fisheries of New South Wales_ (Sydney,
  1883); Ogilvy, _Catalogue of Australian Mammals_ (Sydney, 1892);
  Aflalo, _Natural History of Australia_ (London, 1896); Flower and
  Lydekker, _Mammals, Living and Extinct_ (London, 1891); J. Douglas
  Ogilby, _Catalogue of the Fishes of New South Wales_, 4to (Sydney,
  1886). For Statistics and Miscellanea: T.A. Coghlan, _A Statistical
  Account of the Seven Colonies of Australasia_, 8vo (Sydney, 1904); G.
  Collingridge, _The Discovery of Australia_ (Sydney, 1895); W. Epps,
  _The Land Systems of Australia_, 8vo (London, 1894); Ernest Favenc,
  _The History of Australasian Exploration_, royal 8vo (Sydney, 1885);
  R.R. Garraa, _The Coming Commonwealth: a Handbook of Federal
  Government_ (Sydney, 1897); George William Rusden, _History of
  Australia_, 3 vols. 8vo (London, 1883); K. Schmeisser, _The Goldfields
  of Australasia_, 2 vols. (London, 1899); G.F. Scott, _The Romance of
  Australian Exploring_ (London, 1899); H. de R. Walker, _Australasian
  Democracy_ (London, 1897); William Westgarth, _Half a Century of
  Australian Progress_ (London, 1899); T.A. Coghlan and T.T. Ewing,
  _Progress of Australia in the 19th Century_; G.P. Tregarthen,
  _Commonwealth of Australia_; Ida Lee, _Early Days of Australia_; W.P.
  Reeves, _State Experiments in Australia and New Zealand_; A. Metin,
  _La Socialisme sans doctrine_.

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The literature of the geology of Australia is enumerated, to
    1884, in the bibliography by Etheridge and Jack. A general summary of
    the stratigraphical geology was given by R. Tate, _Rep. Austral.
    Assoc. Adv. Sci._ vol. v. (1893), pp. 1-69. References to the chief
    sources of information regarding the states is given under each of
    them. A geological map of the whole continent, on the scale of 50 m.
    to the inch, was compiled by A. Everett, and issued in 1887 in six
    sheets, by the Geological Survey of Victoria.

  [2] The statistical portion of this article includes Tasmania, which
    is a member of the Australian Commonwealth.

  [3] In his _Discoveries in Central Australia_, E.T. Eyre has
    ingeniously attempted to reconstruct the routes taken by the
    Australians in their advance across the continent. He has relied,
    however, in his efforts to link the tribes together, too much on the
    prevalence or absence of such customs as circumcision--always very
    treacherous evidences--to allow of his hypothetical distribution
    being regarded very seriously. The migrations must have always been
    dependent upon physical difficulties, such as waterless tracts or
    mountain barriers. They were probably not definite massed movements,
    such as would permit of the survival of distinctive lines of custom
    between tribe and tribe; but rather spasmodic movements, sometimes of
    tribes or of groups, sometimes only of families or even couples, the
    first caused by tribal wars, the second to escape punishment for some
    offence against tribal law, such as the defiance of the rules as to
    clan-marriages.

  [4] _The Languages of India_ (1875).

  [5] The existence of "Group Marriage" is a much-controverted point.
    This custom, which has been defined as the invasion of actual
    marriage by allotting permanent paramours, is confined to a special
    set of tribes.

  [6] Australia, it may be noted, has woman's suffrage in all the
    states (Victoria, the last, adopting it in November 1908), and for
    the federal assembly.