AUSTIN, SARAH (1793-1867), English author, was born in 1793, the
daughter of John Taylor (d. 1826), a wool-stapler and a member of the
well-known Taylor family of Norwich. Her great grandfather, Dr John
Taylor (1694-1761), had been pastor of the Presbyterian church there,
and wrote a once famous polemical work on _The Scripture Doctrine of
Original Sin_ (1738), which called forth celebrated treatises by
Jonathan Edwards on _Original Sin_. Her mother, Susannah Cook, was an
exceedingly clever woman who transmitted both her beauty and her talent
to her daughter. Their friends included Dr Alderson and his daughter Mrs
Opie, Henry Crabbe Robinson, the Gurneys and Sir James Mackintosh. Sarah
Taylor married in 1820 John Austin (q.v.). They lived in Queen Square,
Westminster, where Mrs. Austin, whose tastes, unlike her husband's, were
extremely sociable, gathered round her a large circle, Jeremy Bentham,
James Mill and the Grotes being especially intimate. She received many
Italian exiles, who found a real friend in her. In 1821 was born her
only child, Lucie, afterwards Lady Duff-Gordon. Mrs. Austin never
attempted any considerable original work, contenting herself chiefly
with translations, of which the most important are the _History of the
Reformation in Germany_ and the _History of the Popes_ (1840), from the
German of Leopold von Ranke, _Report on the State of Public Instruction
in Prussia_ (1834) from the French of V. Cousin, and F.W. Carove's _The
Story without an End_ (1864). After her husband's death in 1859 she
edited his _Lectures on Jurisprudence_. She also edited the _Memoirs of
Sydney Smith_ (1855) and Lady Duff-Gordon's _Letters from Egypt_ (1865).
She died at Weybridge on the 8th of August 1867.

  See _Three Generations of Englishwomen_ (1888), by her grand-daughter,
  Mrs Janet Ross.