AUSTIN, the capital of Texas, U.S.A., and the county-seat of Travis
county, on the N. bank of the Colorado river, near the centre of the
state and about 145 m. W.N.W. of Houston. Pop. (1890) 14,575; (1900)
22,258, of whom 5822 were negroes; (1910 census) 29,860. Austin is
served by the Houston & Texas Central, the International & Great
Northern, and the Missouri, Kansas & Texas railways. The city is built
on high bluffs 40-120 ft. above the river, which is spanned here by a
bridge, built in 1874. The Texas State Capitol, a handsome building of
red Texas granite, with a dome 318 ft. high, cost more than $3,500,000,
and stands in a square in the centre of the city. It was built
(1881-1888) by Chicago capitalists in exchange for a land grant of
3,000,000 acres. It is in the form of a Greek cross, with an extreme
length of 556.5 ft. and an extreme width of 288.8 ft. Next to the
National Capitol at Washington, it is the largest capitol building in
the United States, and it is said to be one of the ten largest buildings
in the world. Austin is the seat of the University of Texas (opened in
1883; co-educational); the medical department of the state university is
at Galveston, and the departments in Austin are the college of arts,
department of education, department of engineering, department of law,
school of pharmacy, and school of nursing. The government of the
university is vested in a board of eight regents nominated by the
governor and appointed with the advice and consent of the state senate.
At Austin are also state institutions and asylums for the insane, the
blind, the coloured deaf and blind; the state school for the deaf and
dumb; the state Confederate home; the Confederate woman's home (1907;
for wives and widows of Confederate soldiers and sailors), maintained by
the Daughters of the Confederacy; St Mary's Academy (Roman Catholic,
under the supervision of the Sisters of the Holy Cross, founded 1875,
chartered 1886); St Edward's College (Roman Catholic, chartered 1885);
the Austin Presbyterian Theological Seminary (Presbyterian Church,
South), opened in 1902 by the Synod of Texas, and after 1905 partly
controlled by the Synod of Arkansas; Tillotson College (a negro school
under Congregational control, founded by the American Missionary
Association, chartered in 1877, and opened in 1881), and Samuel Huston
College (for negroes; Methodist Episcopal; opened in 1900 and named in
honour of an Iowan benefactor). The principal newspapers of Austin are
the _Statesman_ (Democratic, established in 1871), a morning paper, and
the _Tribune_ (Democratic, established in 1891), an evening paper. The
_Quarterly of the Texas State Historical Society_ is published here.
Austin is the principal trade and jobbing centre for central and western
Texas, is an important market for livestock, cotton, grain and wool, and
has extensive manufactories of flour, cotton-seed oil, leather goods,
lumber and wooden ware; the value of the factory product in 1905 was
$1,569,353, being 105.2% more than in 1900. The city owns and operates
its water-supply system. In 1890-1893 one of the largest dams in the
world, an immense structure of granite masonry, 1200 ft. long. 60-70 ft.
high, and 18 to 66 ft. thick, was constructed across the Colorado river
2 m. above the city for the purpose of supplying water and power,
creating a reservoir (Lake M'Donald) about 30 m. long. Freshets in the
spring of 1900, however, undermined the wall, and on the 7th of April
the dam broke with a resulting loss of several lives and about
$1,000,000 worth of property. The rebuilding of the dam was projected in
1907. Austin was first settled in 1838 and was named Waterloo, but in
1839, when it was chosen as the site of the capital of the Republic of
Texas, it was renamed in honour of Stephen F. Austin, one of its
founders. Under the influence of General Sam Houston the capital was for
a time in 1842-1845 removed from Austin to Houston, but in 1845 an
ordinance was passed making Austin the capital, and it remained the
state capital after Texas entered the Union, although Huntsville and
Tehuacana Springs in 1850 and Houston in 1872 attempted in popular
elections to be chosen in its place. The first Anglo-American settlement
in Texas, established on the Brazos river in 1823 by members of the
Austin colony, was San Felipe de Austin now San Felipe. In 1909 Austin
adopted a commission form of government.