AUSTEN, JANE (1775-1817), English novelist, was born on the 16th of
December 1775 at the parsonage of Steventon, in Hampshire, a village of
which her father, the Rev. George Austen, was rector. She was the
youngest of seven children. Her mother was Cassandra Leigh, niece of
Theophilus Leigh, a dry humorist, and for fifty years master of Balliol,
Oxford. The life of no woman of genius could have been more uneventful
than Miss Austen's. She did not marry, and she never left home except on
short visits, chiefly to Bath. Her first sixteen years were spent in the
rectory at Steventon, where she began early to trifle with her pen,
always jestingly, for family entertainment. In 1801 the Austens moved to
Bath, where Mr Austen died in 1805, leaving only Mrs Austen, Jane and
her sister Cassandra, to whom she was always deeply attached, to keep up
the home; his sons were out in the world, the two in the navy, Francis
William and Charles, subsequently rising to admiral's rank. In 1805 the
Austen ladies moved to Southampton, and in 1809 to Chawton, near Alton,
in Hampshire, and there Jane Austen remained till 1817, the year of her
death, which occurred at Winchester, on July 18th, as a memorial window
in the cathedral testifies.

During her placid life Miss Austen never allowed her literary work to
interfere with her domestic duties: sewing much and admirably, keeping
house, writing many letters and reading aloud. Though, however, her days
were quiet and her area circumscribed, she saw enough of middle-class
provincial society to find a basis on which her dramatic and humorous
faculties might build, and such was her power of searching observation
and her sympathetic imagination that there are not in English fiction
more faithful representations of the life she knew than we possess in
her novels. She had no predecessors in this genre. Miss Austen's "little
bit (two inches wide) of ivory" on which she worked "with so fine a
brush"--her own phrases--was her own invention.

Her best-known, if not her best work, _Pride and Prejudice_, was also
her first. It was written between October 1796 and August 1797,
although, such was the blindness of publishers, not issued until 1813,
two years after _Sense and Sensibility_, which was written, on an old
scenario called "Eleanor and Marianne," in 1797 and 1798. Miss Austen's
inability to find a publisher for these stories, and for _Northanger
Abbey_, written in 1798 (although it is true that she sold that MS. in
1803 for £10 to a Bath bookseller, only, however, to see it locked away
in a safe for some years, to be gladly resold to her later), seems to
have damped her ardour; for there is no evidence that between 1798 and
1809 she wrote anything but the fragment called "The Watsons," after
which year she began to revise her early work for the press. Her other
three books belong to a later date--_Mansfield Park_, _Emma_ and
_Persuasion_ being written between 1811 and 1816. The years of
publication were _Sense and Sensibility_, 1811; _Pride and Prejudice_,
1813; _Mansfield Park_, 1814; and _Emma_, 1816--all in their author's
lifetime. _Persuasion_ and _Northanger Abbey_ were published
posthumously in 1818. All were anonymous, agreeably to their author's
retiring disposition.

Although _Pride and Prejudice_ is the novel which in the mind of the
public is most intimately associated with Miss Austen's name, both
_Mansfield Park_ and _Emma_ are finer achievements--at once riper and
richer and more elaborate. But the fact that _Pride and Prejudice_ is
more single-minded, that the love story of Elizabeth Bennet and D'Arcy
is not only _of_ the book but _is_ the book (whereas the love story of
Emma and Mr Knightley and Fanny Price and Edmund Bertram have parallel
streams), has given _Pride and Prejudice_ its popularity above the
others among readers who are more interested by the course of romance
than by the exposition of character. Entirely satisfactory as is _Pride
and Prejudice_ so far as it goes, it is, however, thin beside the
niceness of analysis of motives in _Emma_ and the wonderful management
of two housefuls of young lovers that is exhibited in _Mansfield Park_.

It has been generally agreed by the best critics that Miss Austen has
never been approached in her own domain. No one indeed has attempted any
close rivalry. No other novelist has so concerned herself or himself
with the trivial daily comedy of small provincial family life,
disdaining equally the assistance offered by passion, crime and
religion. Whatever Miss Austen may have thought privately of these
favourite ingredients of fiction, she disregarded all alike when she
took her pen in hand. Her interest was in life's little perplexities of
emotion and conduct; her gaze was steadily ironical. The most untoward
event in any of her books is Louisa's fall from the Cobb at Lyme Regis,
in _Persuasion_; the most abandoned, Maria's elopement with Crawford, in
_Mansfield Park_. In pure ironical humour Miss Austen's only peer among
novelists is George Meredith, and indeed _Emma_ may be said to be her
_Egoist_, or the _Egoist_ his _Emma_. But irony and fidelity to the fact
alone would not have carried her down the ages. To these gifts she
allied a perfect sense of dramatic progression and an admirably lucid
and flowing prose style which makes her stories the easiest reading.

Recognition came to Miss Austen slowly. It was not until quite recent
times that to read her became a necessity of culture. But she is now
firmly established as an English classic, standing far above Miss Burney
(Madame d'Arblay) and Miss Edgeworth, who in her day were the popular
women novelists of real life, while Mrs Radcliffe and "Monk" Lewis,
whose supernatural fancies' _Northanger Abbey_ was written in part to
ridicule, are no longer anything but names. Although, however, she has
become only lately a household word, Miss Austen had always her
panegyrists among the best intellects--such as Coleridge, Tennyson,
Macaulay, Scott, Sydney Smith, Disraeli and Archbishop Whately, the last
of whom may be said to have been her discoverer. Macaulay, whose
adoration of Miss Austen's genius was almost idolatrous, considered
_Mansfield Park_ her greatest feat; but many critics give the palm to
_Emma_. Disraeli read _Pride and Prejudice_ seventeen times. Scott's
testimony is often quoted: "That young lady had a talent for describing
the involvements, feelings and characters of ordinary life which is to
me the most wonderful I have ever met with. The big bow-wow I can do
myself like any one going; but the exquisite touch which renders
commonplace things and characters interesting from the truth of the
description and the sentiment is denied to me."

  Many monographs on Miss Austen have been written, in addition to the
  authorized _Life_ by her nephew J.E. Austen Leigh in 1870, and the
  collection of her _Letters_ edited by Lord Brabourne in 1884. The
  chief books on her and around her are _Jane Austen_, by S.F. Malden
  (1889); _Jane Austen_, by Goldwin Smith (1890); _Jane Austen: Her
  Contemporaries and Herself_, by W.H. Pollock; _Jane Austen: Her Homes
  and Her Friends_, by Constance Hill (1902); _Jane Austen and Her
  Times_, by G.E. Mitton (1905); _Jane Austen's Sailor Brothers_, by J
  H. and E.C. Hubback (1906); and the essay on her in Lady Richmond
  (Thackeray) Ritchie's _Book of Sibyls_ (1883).     (E. V. L.)