APOLLONIUS OF TYRE, a medieval tale supposed to be derived from a lost
Greek original. The earliest mention of the story is in the _Carmina_
(Bk. vi. 8, II. 5-6) of Venantius Fortunatus, in the second half of the
6th century, and the romance may well date from three centuries earlier.
It bears a marked resemblance to the _Antheia and Habrokomes_ of
Xenophon of Ephesus. The story relates that King Antiochus, maintaining
incestuous relations with his daughter, kept off her suitors by asking
them a riddle, which they must solve on pain of losing their heads.
Apollonius of Tyre solved the riddle, which had to do with Antiochus's
secret. He returned to Tyre, and, to escape the king's vengeance, set
sail in search of a place of refuge. In Cyrene he married the daughter
of King Archistrates, and presently, on receiving news of the death of
Antiochus, departed to take possession of the kingdom of Antioch, of
which he was, for no clear reason, the heir. On the voyage his wife
died, or rather seemed to die, in giving birth to a daughter, and the
sailors demanded that she should be thrown overboard. Apollonius left
his daughter, named Tarsia, at Tarsus in the care of guardians who
proved false to their trust. Father, mother, and daughter were only
reunited after fourteen years' separation and many vicissitudes. The
earliest Latin MS. of this tale, preserved at Florence, dates from the
9th or 10th century. The pagan features of the supposed original are by
no means all destroyed. The ceremonies observed by Tarsia at her nurse's
grave, and the preparations for the burning of the body of Apollonius's
wife, are purely pagan. The riddles which Tarsia propounds to her father
are obviously interpolated. They are taken from the _Enigmata_ of
Caelius Firmianus Symposius. The many inconsistencies of the story seem
to be best explained by the supposition (E. Rohde, _Der griechische
Roman_, 2nd ed., 1900, pp. 435 _et seq_.) that the Antiochus story was
originally entirely separate from the story of Apollonius's wanderings,
and was clumsily tacked on by the Latin author. The romance kept its
form through a vast number of medieval rearrangements, and there is
little change in its outlines as set forth in the Shakespearian play of
_Pericles_.

  The Latin tale is preserved in about 100 MSS., and was printed by M.
  Velser (Augsburg, 1595), by J. Lapaume in _Script. Erot_. (Didot,
  Paris, 1856), and by A. Riese in the _Bibl. Teubneriana_ (1871, new
  ed. 1893). The most widespread versions in the middle ages were those
  of Godfrey of Viterbo in his _Pantheon_ (1185), where it is related as
  authentic history, and in the _Gesta Romanorum_ (cap. 153), which
  formed the basis of the German folk-tale by H. Steinhöwel (Augsburg,
  1471), the Dutch version (Delft, 1493), the French in _Le Violier des
  histoires romaines_ (Paris, 1521), the English, by Laurence Twine
  (London, 1576, new ed. 1607), also of the Scandinavian, Czech, and
  Hungarian tales.

  In England a translation was made as early as the 11th century (ed. B.
  Thorpe, 1834, and J. Zupitza in _Archiv für neuere Sprachen_, 1896);
  there is a Middle English metrical version (J.O. Halliwell, _A New
  Boke about Shakespeare_, 1850), by a poet who says he was vicar of
  Wimborne; John Gower uses the tale as an example of the seventh deadly
  sin in the eighth book of his _Confessio Amantis_; Robert Copland
  translated a prose romance of _Kynge Apollyne of Thyre_ (Wynkyn de
  Worde, 1510) from the French; _Pericles_ was entered at Stationers'
  Hall in 1607, and was followed in the next year by George Wilkins's
  novel, _The Painfull Adventures of Pericles, Prynce of Tyre_ (ed.
  Tycho Mommsen, Oldenburg, 1857), and George Lillo drew his play
  _Marina_ (1738) from the piece associated with Shakespeare; _Orendel_,
  by a Middle High German minnesinger, contains some of the episodes of
  _Apollonius_; Heinrich von Neustadt wrote a poem of 20,000 lines on
  _Apollonius von Tyrland_ (c. 1400); the story was well known in
  Spanish, _Libre de Apolonio_ (verse, c. 1200), and in J. de Timoneda's
  _Patrañuelo_ (1576); in French much of it was embodied in _Jourdain de
  Blaives_ (13th cent.), and it also appears in Italian and medieval
  Greek. See A.H. Smyth, _Shakespeare's Pericles and Apollonius of Tyre_
  (Philadelphia, 1898); Elimar Klebs, _Die Erzahlung van A. aus Tyrus_
  (Berlin, 1899); S. Singer, _Apollonius van Tyrus_ (Halle, 1895).