APPENZELL, the political capital of the Inner Rhoden half of the Swiss
canton of Appenzell. It is built in a smiling green hollow on the left
bank of the Sitter stream, which is formed by the union of several
mountain torrents descending from the Säntis. By light railways it is
12½ m. from St Gall past Gais or 20½ m. past Herisau. Its chief streets
are paved, but it is rather a large village than a town, though in 1900
it had 4574 inhabitants, practically all German-speaking and Romanists.
It has a stately modern parish church (attached to a Gothic choir), a
small but very ancient chapel of the abbots of St Gall (whose summer
residence was this village), and two Capuchin convents (one for men,
founded in 1588, and one for women, founded in 1613). Among the
archives, kept in the sacristy of the church, are several banners
captured by the Appenzellers in former days, among them one taken in
1406 at Imst, near Lanedeck, with the inscription _Hundert Teufel_,
though popularly this number is multiplied a thousandfold. In the
principal square the _Landsgemeinde_ (or cantonal democratic assembly)
is held annually in the open air on the last Sunday in April. The
inhabitants are largely employed in the production of embroidery, though
also engaged in various pastoral occupations. About 2½ m. by road
south-east of Appenzell is Weissbad, a well-known goat's whey cure
establishment, while 1½ hours above it is the quaint little chapel of
Wildkirchli, built (1648) in a rock cavern, on the way to the Säntis.
     (W. A. B. C.)