APULIA (sometimes APPULIA in manuscripts but never in inscriptions), the
district inhabited in ancient times by the Apuli. Strictly a Samnite
tribe (see SAMNITES) settled round Mount Garganus on the east coast of
Italy (Strabo vi. 3. 11), the Apuli mingled with the Iapygian tribes of
that part of the coast (Dauni, Peucetii, Poediculi) who, like the
Messapii, had come from Illyria, so that the name Apulia reached down to
the border of the ancient Calabria. Almost the only monument of Samnite
speech from the district is the famous _Tabula Bantina_ from Bantia, a
small city just inside the Peucetian part of Apulia, on the Lucanian
border. This inscription is one of the latest and in some ways the most
important monument of Oscan, though showing what appear to be some
southern peculiarities (see OSCA LINGUA). Its date is almost certainly
between 118 and 90 B.C., and it shows that Latin had not even then
spread over the district (cf. LUCANIA). Far older than this are some
coins from Ausculum and Teate (later known as Teanum Apulum), of which
the earliest belong to the 4th century B.C. Roman or Latin colonies were
few, Luceria (planted 314 B.C.) in the north and Brundisium (soon after
268) being the chief. (See R.S. Conway, _Italic Dialects_, xxviii.-xxx.
pp. 15 f.; and Mommsen's introduction to the opening sections of
_C.I.L._ ix.)     (R. S. C.)

The wars of the 4th and 3rd centuries B.C. brought a great part of the
pastures of the Apulian plain into the hands of the Roman state, and a
tax was paid on every head of cattle and every sheep, at first to the
tax farmer and later to the imperial procurator. It was under the Romans
that the system of migration for the flocks reached its full
development, and the practice is still continued; the sheep-tracks
(_tratturi_), 350 ft. wide, leading from the mountains of the Abruzzi to
the plain of Apulia date in the main at least from the Roman period, and
are mentioned in inscriptions. The plain, however, which once served as
winter grazing ground for a million sheep, now gives pasture to about
one-half of that number.[1] The shepherds, who were slaves, often gave
considerable trouble; we hear that some 7000 of them, who had made the
whole country unsafe, were condemned to death in 185 B.C. (Livy xxxix.
29). Sheep-farming on a large scale was no doubt detrimental to the
interests of the towns. We hear of repeated risings, for the last time
in the Social War. Even in the 4th century B.C. the then chief town of
Apulia, Teate or Teanum Apulum (see above), suffered in this way.
Luceria subsequently took its place, largely owing to its military
importance; but under the Empire it was succeeded by Canusium.

The road system of Apulia, which touched all the important towns,
consisted of three main lines, the Via Appia (see APPIA, VIA), the Via
Traiana, and the coast road, running more or less parallel in an
east-south-east direction. The first (the southernmost), coming east
from Beneventum, entered Apulia at the Pons Aufidi, and ran through
Venusia to Tarentum, and thence, turning north-east, to Brundusium. The
second, coming north-east from Beneventum, turned east at Aecae, and ran
through Herdoniae, Canusium, Butuntum, Barium and Gnathia (Gnatia) to
Brundusium. There was also a short cut from Butuntum to Gnathia through
Caelia, keeping inland. The third parallel line ran to the north of the
Via Traiana, in continuation of the road along the north-east coast of
Picenum and Samnium; it entered Apulia near Larinum (whence a branch ran
south to Bovianum Undecimanorum), and thence, keeping in the plain to
the south of the Mons Garganus, rejoined the coast at Sipontum, where it
received a branch road from the Via Traiana at Aecae, passing through
Luceria and Arpi. It then passed through Barduli (where it was joined by
a road from Canusium by way of Cannae) to Barium, where it joined the
Via Traiana. From Barium a road probably ran direct to Caelia, and
thence south-south-east to join the Via Appia some 25 m. north-west of
Tarentum.

Barium was an important harbour, though less so than Brundusium and
Tarentum, which, however, belonged to Calabria in the Roman sense.
Apulia, with Calabria, formed the second region of Augustus, though we
once find Calabria treated as a part of the third region, Lucania
(_C.I.L._ ix. 2213). The Hannibalic and later wars had, Strabo tells us,
destroyed the former prosperity of the country; in imperial times we
hear little or nothing of it. Both were governed by a _corrector_ from
the time of Constantine onwards, but in 668 the Lombards conquered
Calabria and Apulia, and it was then that the former name was
transferred to Bruttium, the meaning of the latter being extended to
include Calabria also. In the 10th century the greater part of this
territory was recovered by the Byzantine emperors, whose governor was
called [Greek: Katapanos], a name which, under the corrupt form
Capitanata, belonged to the province of Foggia till 1861. It was
conquered by the Normans under William Bras-de-fer, who took the title
of _comes Apuliae_ in 1042; it was raised to a dukedom with Calabria by
Robert Guiscard in 1059, and united to the Sicilian monarchy in 1127.
Many of the important towns possess fine Romanesque cathedrals,
constructed under the Normans and the Hohenstaufen rulers. It shared the
subsequent fate of Sicily, becoming a part of the kingdom of the Two
Sicilies in 1734, and being united with Italy in 1861.

  Modern Apulia.

Modern Apulia comprises the three provinces of Foggia, Bari and Lecce
(the latter corresponding roughly with the ancient Calabria, which,
however, extended somewhat farther north inland), and is often known as
Le Puglie; it stretches from Monte Gargano to the south-east extremity
of Italy, with an area of 7376 sq. m.; it is bounded on the north and
east by the Adriatic, on the south-east by the Gulf of Taranto, on the
south by Basilicata and on the west by Campania and the Abruzzi. The
three provinces correspond to the three natural divisions into which it
falls. That of Foggia, though it has mountains on the west and
south-west boundary, and the Monte Gargano at its north-east extremity,
is in the main a great plain called the Tavoliere (chessboard) di
Puglia, with considerable lagoons on its north and east coast. That of
Bari, east-south-east of Foggia and divided from it by the Ofanto
(Aufidus), the only considerable river of Apulia, 104 m. long, is a
hilly district with a coast strip along which are the majority of the
towns--the lack of villages is especially noticeable; in the
_circondario_ of Barletta, the north-east portion of the province, there
are only eleven communes, with a total population of 335,934. That of
Lecce, to the east-south-east again, is a low flat limestone terrace.

The industries of Apulia are mainly pastoral or agricultural. Besides
sheep, a considerable number of horses, cattle and swine are bred; while
despite the lack of water, which is the great need of modern Apulia (in
1906 arrangements were made for a great aqueduct, to supply the three
provinces from the headwaters of the Sele), cultivation is actively
carried on, especially in the province of Bari, where grain, wine,
olives, almonds, lemons, oranges, tobacco, &c., are produced in
abundance, and the export of olive oil is attaining considerable
importance. The salt works of Margherita di Savoia produce large
quantities of salt, and nitre is extracted near Molfetta.

Railway communications are fairly good, the main line from Bologna to
Brindisi passing through the whole length of Apulia, by way of Foggia
and Bari, and having branches from Foggia (the main railway centre of
Apulia) to Benevento and Caserta, to Manfredonia, to Lucera and to
Rocchetta S. Antonio (and thence to either Avellino, Potenza or Gioia
del Colle), from Ofantino to Margherita di Savoia, from Barletta to
Spinazzola (between Rocchetta S. Antonio and Gioia del Colle), from Bari
to Putignano, and via Gioia del Colle to Taranto, and from Brindisi to
Taranto, and to Lecce and Otranto; besides which, there is a steam
tramway from Barletta to Bari via Andria.

The most important harbours of Apulia are Brindisi, Bari, Taranto,
Barletta, Molfetta and Gallipoli. The export of olive oil to foreign
countries from the province of Lecce in 1905 amounted to 1048 tons, as
against 3395 in 1901; but that to home ports increased from 7077 to 9025
tons in the same period. The production of wine was 358,953 tons in 1905
as against 203,995 tons in 1901 (an exceptionally bad year) and 284,156
tons in 1902. Of this 211,872 tons were forwarded by rail and sea, in
the proportion of five to two respectively, the rest being used for home
consumption and as a reserve. The cultivation of oriental tobacco is
extending in the province (see _Consular Report_, No. 3672, July 1906).

The population of the province of Foggia was 425,450 (1901) as against
322,755 in 1871, the chief towns being Foggia (53,151), Cerignola
(34,195), S. Severo (30,040), Monte S. Angelo (21,870), S. Marco in
Lamis (17,309), Lucera (17,515); that of Bari, 827,698 (1901) as against
604,540 in 1871, the chief towns being Bari (77,478), Andria (49,569),
Barletta (42,022), Corato (41,573), Molfetta (40,135), Trani (31,800),
Bisceglie (30,885), Bitonto (30,617), Canosa (24,169), Ruvo (23,776),
Terlizzi (23,232), Altamura(22,729), Monopoli (22,545), Gioia del Colle
(21,721); that of Lecce, 706,520 (1901) as against 493,594 in 1871, the
chief towns being Taranto (60,733), Lecce (32,687), Brindisi (25,317),
Martina Franca (25,007), Ostuni (22,997), Francavilla Fontana (20,422),
Ceglie Messapica (16,867), Nardo (14,387), Galatina (14,071), Gallipoli
(13,552), Manduria (13,113).     (T. As.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] The migration was made compulsory by Alphonso I. in 1442, and
    remained so until 1865. Since that time the _tratturi_ have been to
    some extent absorbed by private proprietors.