AQUILA, a city of the Abruzzi, Italy, the capital of the province of
Aquila, and the seat of an archbishop, 2360 ft. above sea-level, 50 m.
directly N.E. of Rome, and 145 m. by rail. Pop. (1901) town, 18,494;
commune, 21,261. It lies on a hill in the wide valley of the Aterno,
surrounded by mountains on all sides, the Gran Sasso d'Italia being
conspicuous on the north-east. It is a favourite summer resort of the
Italians, but is cold and windy in winter. In the highest part of the
town is the massive citadel, erected by the Spanish viceroy Don Pedro de
Toledo in 1534. The church of S. Bernardino di Siena (1472) has a fine
Renaissance façade by Nicolò Filotesio (commonly called Cola dell'
Amatrice), and contains the monumental tomb of the saint, decorated with
beautiful sculptures, and executed by Silvestro Ariscola in 1480. The
church of S. Maria di Collemaggio, just outside the town, has a very
fine Romanesque façade of simple design (1270-1280) in red and white
marble, with three finely decorated portals and a rose-window above
each. The two side doors are also fine. The interior contains the
mausoleum of Pope Celestine V. (d. 1296) erected in 1517. Many smaller
churches in the town have similar façades (S. Giusta, S. Silvestro,
&c.). The town also contains some fine palaces: the municipality has a
museum, with a collection of Roman inscriptions and some illuminated
service books. The Palazzi Dragonetti and Persichetti contain private
collections of pictures. Outside the town is the _Fontana delle
novantanove cannelle_, a fountain with ninety-nine jets distributed
along three walls, constructed in 1272. Aquila has some trade in lace
and saffron, and possesses other smaller industries. It was a university
town in the middle ages, but most of its chairs have now been
suppressed.

Aquila was founded by Conrad, son of the emperor Frederick II., about
1250, as a bulwark against the power of the papacy. It was destroyed by
Manfred in 1259, but soon rebuilt by Charles I. of Anjou. Its walls were
completed in 1316; and it maintained itself as an almost independent
republic until it was subdued in 1521 by the Spaniards, who had become
masters of the kingdom of Naples in 1503. It was twice sacked by the
French in 1799.

  See V. Bindi, _Monumenti storici ed artistici degli Abruzzi_ (Naples,
  1889), pp. 771 seq.