AQUINO, a town and episcopal see of Campania, Italy, in the province of
Caserta; it is 56 m. N.W. by rail from the town of Caserta, and 7½ m.
N.W. of Cassino. Pop. (1901) 2672. The modern town, close to the
ancient, is unimportant, though the canons of the cathedral have the
privilege of wearing the mitre and _cappa magna_ at great festivals. It
is close to the site of the ancient Aquinum, a _municipium_ in the time
of Cicero, and made a colony by the Triumviri, the birthplace of Juvenal
and of the emperor Pescennius Niger. The Via Latina traversed it; one of
the gates through which it passed, now called Porta S. Lorenzo, is still
well preserved, and there are remains within the walls (portions of
which, built of large blocks of limestone, still remain) of two (so
called) temples, a basilica and an amphitheatre (see R. Delbrück in
_Röm. Mitteilungen_, 1903, p. 143). Outside, on the south is a
well-preserved triumphal arch with composite capitals, and close to it
the 11th-century basilica of S. Maria Libera, a handsome building in the
Romanesque style, but now roofless. Several Roman inscriptions are built
into it, and many others that have been found indicate the ancient
importance of the place, which, though it does not appear in early
history, is vouched for by Cicero and Strabo.[1] A colony was planted
here by the Triumviri. St Thomas Aquinas was born in the castle of
Roccasecca, 5 m. N.

  See E. Grossi, _Aquinum_ (Rome, 1907).     (T. As.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] According to H. Nissen, _Ital. Landeskunde_ (Berlin, 1902), ii.
    665, a road ran from here to Minturnae; but no traces of it are to be
    seen.