ARABIA, a peninsula in the south-west of Asia, lying between 34° 30' and
12° 45' N., and 32° 30' and 60° E., is bounded W. by the Red Sea, S. by
the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean, and E. by the Gulf of Oman and
the Persian Gulf. Its northern or land boundary is more difficult to
define; most authorities, however, agree in taking it from El Arish on
the Mediterranean, along the southern border of Palestine, between the
Dead Sea and the Gulf of Akaba, then bending northwards along the Syrian
border nearly to Tadmur, thence eastwards to the edge of the Euphrates
valley near Anah, and thence south-east to the mouth of the Shat el Arab
at the head of the Persian Gulf,--the boundary so defined includes the
northern desert, which belongs geographically to Arabia rather than to
Syria; while on the same grounds lower Mesopotamia and Irak, although
occupied by an Arab population, are excluded.

In shape, the peninsula forms a rough trapezium, with its greatest
length from north-west to south-east. The length of its western side
from Port Said to Aden is 1500 m.; its base from the Straits of
Bab-el-Mandeb (or Bab al Mandab) to Ras el Had is 1300 m., its northern
side from Port Said to the Euphrates 600 m.; its total area
approximately 1,200,000 sq. m.

GEOGRAPHY

_General Features._--In general terms Arabia may be described as a
plateau sloping gently from south-west to north-east, and attaining its
greatest elevation in the extreme south-west. The western escarpment of
the plateau rises steeply from the Red Sea littoral to a height of from
4000 to 8000 ft., leaving a narrow belt of lowland rarely exceeding 30
m. in width between the shore and the foot-hills. On the north-east and
east the plateau shelves gradually to the Euphrates and the Persian
Gulf; only in the extreme east is this general easterly slope arrested
by the lofty range of Jebel Akhdar, which from Ras Musandan to Ras el
Had borders the coast of Oman.

Its chief characteristic is the bareness and aridity of its surface;
one-third of the whole desert, and of the remainder only a small
proportion is suited to settled life, owing to its scanty water-supply
and uncertain rainfall. Its mountains are insufficient in elevation and
extent to attract their full share of the monsoon rains, which fall so
abundantly on the Abyssinian highlands on the other side of the Red Sea;
for this reason Arabia has neither lakes nor forests to control the
water-supply and prevent its too rapid dissipation, and the rivers are
mere torrent beds sweeping down occasionally in heavy floods, but
otherwise dry.

The country falls naturally into three main divisions, a northern, a
central and a southern; the first includes the area between the Midian
coast on the west and the head of the Persian Gulf on the east, a desert
tract throughout, stony in the north, sandy in the south, but furnishing
at certain seasons excellent pasturage; its population is almost
entirely nomad and pastoral. The central zone includes Hejaz (or Hijaz),
Nejd and El Hasa; much of it is a dry, stony or sandy steppe, with few
wells or watering-places, and only occupied by nomad tribes; but the
great wadis which intersect it contain many fertile stretches of
alluvial soil, where cultivation is possible and which support a
considerable settled population, with several large towns and numerous
villages.

The third or southern division contains the highland plateaus of Asir
and Yemen in the west, and J. Akhdar in the east, which with a temperate
climate, due to their great elevation and their proximity to the sea,
deserve, if any part of Arabia does, the name of Arabia Felix--the
population is settled and agricultural, and the soil, wherever the
rainfall is sufficient, is productive. The Batina coast of Oman,
irrigated by the mountain streams of J. Akhdar, is perhaps the most
fertile district in the peninsula; Hadramut, too, contains many large
and prosperous villages, and the torrents from the Yemen highlands
fertilize several oases in the Tehama (or Tihama) or lowlands of the
western and southern coast. These favourable conditions of soil and
climate, however, extend only a comparatively short distance into the
interior, by far the larger part of which is covered by the great
southern desert, the Dahna, or Ruba el Khali, empty as its name implies,
and uninhabitable.

_Exploration._--Before entering on a detailed description of the several
provinces of Arabia, our sources of information will be briefly
indicated. Except in the neighbourhood of Aden, no regular surveys
exist, and professional work is limited to the marine surveys of the
Indian government and the admiralty, which, while laying down the coast
line with fair accuracy, give little or no topographical information
inland. For the mapping of the whole vast interior, except in rare
cases, no data exist beyond the itineraries of explorers, travelling as
a rule under conditions which precluded the use of even the simplest
surveying instruments. These journeys, naturally following the most
frequented routes, often cover the same ground, while immense tracts,
owing to their difficulty of access, remain unvisited by any European.

The region most thoroughly explored is Yemen, in the south-west corner
of the peninsula, where the labours of a succession of travellers from
Niebuhr in 1761 to E. Glaser and R. Manzoni in 1887 have led to a fairly
complete knowledge of all that part of the province west of the capital
Sana; while in 1902-1904 the operations of the Anglo-Turkish boundary
commission permitted the execution of a systematic topographical survey
of the British protectorate from the Red Sea to the Wadi Bana, 30 m.
east of Aden. North of Yemen up to the Hejaz border the only authority
is that of E.F. Jomard's map, published in 1839, based on the
information given by the French officers employed with Ibrahim Pasha's
army in Asir from 1824 to 1827, and of J. Halévy in Nejran. On the south
coast expeditions have penetrated but a short distance, the most notable
exceptions being those of L. Hirsch and J.T. Bent in 1887 to the
Hadramut valley. S.B. Miles, J.R. Wellsted, and S.M. Zwemer have
explored Oman in the extreme east; but the interior south of a line
drawn from Taif to El Katr on the Persian Gulf is still virgin ground.
In northern Arabia the Syrian desert and the great Nafud (Nefud) have
been crossed by several travellers, though a large area remains
unexplored in the north-east between Kasim and the gulf. In the centre,
the journeys of W. Palgrave, C. Doughty, W. Blunt and C. Huber have done
much to elucidate the main physical features of the country. Lastly, in
the north-west the Sinai peninsula has been thoroughly explored, and the
list of travellers who have visited the Holy Cities and traversed the
main pilgrim routes through Hejaz is a fairly long one, though, owing to
the difficulties peculiar to that region, the hydrography of southern
Hejaz is still incompletely known.

  Modern Exploration in Yemen.

The story of modern exploration begins with the despatch of C. Niebuhr's
mission by the Danish government in 1761. After a year spent in Egypt
and the Sinai peninsula the party reached Jidda towards the end of 1762,
and after a short stay sailed on to Lohaia in the north of Yemen, the
exploration of which formed the principal object of the expedition;
thence, travelling through the Tehama or lowlands, Niebuhr and his
companions visited the towns of Bet el Fakih, Zubed and Mokha, then the
great port for the coffee trade of Yemen. Continuing eastward they
crossed the mountainous region and reached the highlands of Yemen at
Uden, a small town and the centre of a district celebrated for its
coffee. Thence proceeding eastwards to higher altitudes where coffee
plantations give way to fields of wheat and barley, they reached the
town of Jibla situated among a group of mountains exceeding 10,000 ft.
above sea-level; and turning southwards to Taiz descended again to the
Tehama via Hes and Zubed to Mokha. The mission, reduced in numbers by
the death of its archaeologist, von Haven, again visited Taiz in June
1763, where after some delay permission was obtained to visit Sana, the
capital of the province and the residence of the ruling sovereign or
imam. The route lay by Jibla, passing the foot of the lofty Jebel Sorak,
where, in spite of illness, Forskal, the botanist of the party, was able
to make a last excursion; a few days later he died at Yarim. The mission
continued its march, passing Dhamar, the seat of a university of the
Zedi sect, then frequented by 500 students. Thence four marches,
generally over a stony plateau dominated by bare, sterile mountains,
brought them to Sana, where they received a cordial welcome from the
imam, el Mahdi Abbas.

The aspect of the city must have been nearly the same as at present;
Niebuhr describes the _enceinte_ flanked by towers, the citadel at the
foot of J. Nukum which rises 1000 ft. above the valley, the fortress and
palace of the imams, now replaced by the Turkish military hospital, the
suburb of Bir el Azab with its scattered houses and gardens, the Jews'
quarter and the village of Rauda, a few miles to the north in a fertile,
irrigated plain which Niebuhr compares to that of Damascus. After a stay
of ten days at Sana the mission set out again for Mokha, travelling by
what is now the main route from the capital to Hodeda, through the rich
coffee-bearing district of J. Haraz, and thence southward to Mokha,
where they embarked for India. During the next year three other members
of the party died, leaving Niebuhr the sole survivor. Returning to
Arabia a year later, he visited Oman and the shores of the Persian Gulf,
and travelling from Basra through Syria and Palestine he reached Denmark
in 1764 after four years' absence.

The period was perhaps specially favourable for a scientific mission of
the sort. The outburst of fanaticism which convulsed Arabia twenty years
later had not then reached Yemen, and Europeans, as such, were not
exposed to any special danger. The travellers were thus able to move
freely and to pursue their scientific enquiries without hindrance from
either people or ruler. The results published in 1772 gave for the first
time a comprehensive description not only of Yemen but of all Arabia;
while the parts actually visited by Niebuhr were described with a
fulness and accuracy of detail which left little or nothing for his
successors to discover.

  Asir.

  Jauf and Marib.

C.G. Ehrenberg and W.F. Hemprich in 1825 visited the Tehama and the
islands off the coast, and in 1836 P.E. Botta made an important journey
in southern Yemen with a view to botanical research, but the next
advance in geographical knowledge in south Arabia was due to the French
officers, M.O. Tamisier, Chedufau and Mary, belonging to the Egyptian
army in Asir; another Frenchman, L. Arnaud, formerly in the Egyptian
service, was the first to visit the southern Jauf and to report on the
rock-cut inscriptions and ruins of Marib, though it was not till 1869
that a competent archaeologist, J. Halévy, was able to carry out any
complete exploration there. Starting from Sana, Halévy went
north-eastward to El Madid, a town of 5000 inhabitants and the capital
of the small district of Nihm; thence crossing a plateau, where he saw
the ruins of numerous crenellated towers, he reached the village of
Mijzar at the foot of J. Yam, on the borders of Jauf, a vast sandy
plain, extending eastwards to El Jail and El Hazm, where Halévy made his
most important discoveries of Sabaean inscriptions: here he explored
Main, the ancient capital of the Minaeans, Kamna on the banks of the W.
Kharid, the ancient Caminacum, and Kharibat el Beda, the Nesca of Pliny,
where the Sabaean army was defeated by the Romans under Aelius Gallus in
24 B.C. From El Jail Halévy travelled northward, passing the oasis of
Khab, and skirting the great desert, reached the fertile district of
Nejran, where he found a colony of Jews, with whom he spent several
weeks in the oasis of Makhlaf. An hour's march to the east he discovered
at the village of Medinat el Mahud the ruins of the Nagra metropolis of
Ptolemy. In June 1870 he at last reached the goal of his journey, Marib;
here he explored the ruins of Medinat an Nahas (so called from its
numerous inscriptions engraved on brass plates), and two hours to the
east he found the famous dam constructed by the Himyarites across the W.
Shibwan, on which the water-supply of their capital depended.

One other explorer has since visited Marib, the Austrian archaeologist,
E. Glaser (1855-1908), who achieved more for science in Yemen than any
traveller since Niebuhr. Under Turkish protection, he visited the
territory of the Hashid and Bakil tribes north-east of Sana, and though
their hostile attitude compelled him to return after reaching their
first important town, Khamr, he had time to reconnoitre the plateau
lying between the two great wadis Kharid and Hirran, formerly covered
with Himyaritic towns and villages; and to trace the course of these
wadis to their junction at El Ish in the Dhu Husen country, and thence
onward to the Jauf. In 1889 he succeeded, again under Turkish escort, in
reaching Marib, where he obtained, during a stay of thirty days, a large
number of new Himyaritic inscriptions. He was unable, however, to
proceed farther east than his predecessors, and the problem of the Jauf
drainage and its possible connexion with the upper part of the Hadramut
valley still remains unsolved.

  Exploration in Hadramut.

The earliest attempt to penetrate into the interior from the south coast
was made in 1835 when Lieuts. C. Cruttenden and J.R. Wellsted of the
"Palinurus," employed on the marine survey of the Arabian coast, visited
the ruins of Nakb (el Hajar) in the W. Mefat. The Himyaritic
inscriptions found there and at Husn Ghurab near Mukalla, were the first
records discovered of ancient Arabian civilization in Hadramut. Neither
of these officers was able to follow up their discoveries, but in 1843
Adolph von Wrede landed at Mukalla and, adopting the character of a
pilgrim to the shrine of the prophet Hud, made his way northward across
the high plateau into the W. Duwan, one of the main southern tributaries
of the Hadramut valley, and pushed on to the edge of the great southern
desert; on his return to the W. Duwan his disguise was detected and he
was obliged to return to Mukalla. Though he did not actually enter the
main Hadramut valley, which lay to the east of his track, his journey
established the existence of this populous and fertile district which
had been reported to the officers of the "Palinurus" as lying between
the coast range and the great desert to the north. This was at last
visited in 1893 by L. Hirsch under the protection of the sultan of
Mukalla, the head of the Kaiti family, and practically ruler of all
Hadramut, with the exception of the towns of Saiyun and Tarim, which
belong to the Kathiri tribe. Starting like von Wrede from Mukalla,
Hirsch first visited the W. Duwan and found ancient ruins and
inscriptions near the village of Hajren; thence he proceeded
north-eastward to Hauta in the main valley, where he was hospitably
received by the Kaiti sultan, and sent on to his deputy at Shibam. Here
he procured a Kathiri escort and pushed on through Saiyun to Tarim, the
former capital. After a very brief stay, however, he was compelled by
the hostility of the people to return in haste to Shibam, from which he
travelled by the W. bin Ali and W. Adim back to Mukalla. J. Theodore
Bent and his wife followed in the same track a few months later with a
well-equipped party including a surveyor, Imam Sharif, lent by the
Indian government, who made a very valuable survey of the country passed
through. Both parties visited many sites where Himyaritic remains and
inscriptions were found, but the hostile attitude of the natives, more
particularly of the Seyyids, the religious hierarchy of Hadramut,
prevented any adequate examination, and much of archaeological interest
undoubtedly remains for future travellers to discover.

  Exploration in Oman.

In Oman, where the conditions are more favourable, explorers have
penetrated only a short distance from the coast. Niebuhr did not go
inland from Muscat; the operations by a British Indian force on the
Pirate coast in 1810 gave no opportunities for visiting the interior,
and it was not till 1835 that J.R. Wellsted, who had already tried to
penetrate into Hadramut from the south, landed at Muscat with the idea
of reaching it from the north-east. Sailing thence to Sur near Ras el
Had, he travelled southward through the country of the Bani bu Ali to
the borders of the desert, then turning north-west up the Wadi Betha
through a fertile, well-watered country, running up to the southern
slopes of J. Akhdar, inhabited by a friendly people who seem to have
welcomed him everywhere, he visited Ibra, Semed and Nizwa at the
southern foot of the mountains. Owing to the disturbed state of the
country, due to the presence of raiding parties from Nejd, Wellsted was
unable to carry out his original intention of exploring the country to
the west, and after an excursion along the Batina coast to Sohar he
returned to India.

In 1876 Colonel S.B. Miles, who had already done much to advance
geographical interests in south Arabia, continued Wellsted's work in
Oman; starting from Sohar on the Batina coast he crossed the dividing
range into the Dhahira, and reached Birema, one of its principal oases.
His investigations show that the Dhahira contains many settlements, with
an industrious agricultural population, and that the unexplored tract
extending 250 m. west to the peninsula of El Katr is a desolate gravelly
steppe, shelving gradually down to the salt marshes which border the
shores of the gulf.

  Exploration in Hejaz.

Leaving southern Arabia, we now come to the centre and north. The first
explorer to enter the sacred Hejaz with a definite scientific object was
the Spaniard, Badia y Leblich, who, under the name of Ali Bey and
claiming to be the last representative of the Abbasid Caliphs, arrived
at Jidda in 1807, and performed the pilgrimage to Mecca. Besides giving
to the world the first accurate description of the holy city and the Haj
ceremonies, he was the first to fix the position of Mecca by
astronomical observations, and to describe the physical character of its
surroundings. But the true pioneer of exploration in Hejaz was J.L.
Burckhardt, who had already won a reputation as the discoverer of Petra,
and whose experience of travel in Arab lands and knowledge of Arab life
qualified him to pass as a Moslem, even in the headquarters of Islam.
Burckhardt landed in Jidda in July 1814, when Mehemet Ali had already
driven the Wahhabi invaders out of Hejaz, and was preparing for his
farther advance against their stronghold in Nejd. He first visited Taif
at the invitation of the pasha, thence he proceeded to Mecca, where he
spent three months studying every detail of the topography of the holy
places, and going through all the ceremonies incumbent on a Moslem
pilgrim. In January 1815 he travelled to Medina by the western or coast
route, and arrived there safely but broken in health by the hardships of
the journey. His illness did not, however, prevent his seeing and
recording everything of interest in Medina with the same care as at
Mecca, though it compelled him to cut short the further journey he had
proposed to himself, and to return by Yambu and the sea to Cairo, where
he died only two years later.

His striking successor, Sir Richard Burton, covered nearly the same
ground thirty-eight years afterwards. He, too, travelling as a Moslem
pilgrim, noted the whole ritual of the pilgrimage with the same keen
observation as Burckhardt, and while amplifying somewhat the latter's
description of Medina, confirms the accuracy of his work there and at
Mecca in almost every detail. Burton's topographical descriptions are
fuller, and his march to Mecca from Medina by the eastern route led him
over ground not traversed by any other explorer in Hejaz: this route
leads at first south-east from Medina, and then south across the lava
beds of the Harra, keeping throughout its length on the high plateau
which forms the borderland between Hejaz and Nejd. His original
intention had been after visiting Mecca to find his way across the
peninsula to Oman, but the time at his disposal (as an Indian officer on
leave) was insufficient for so extended a journey; and his further
contributions to Arabian geography were not made until twenty-five years
later, when he was deputed by the Egyptian government to examine the
reported gold deposits of Midian. Traces of ancient workings were found
in several places, but the ores did not contain gold in paying
quantities. Interesting archaeological discoveries were made, and a
valuable topographical survey was carried out, covering the whole Midian
coast from the head of the Gulf of Akaba to the mouth of the Wadi Hamd,
and including both the Tehama range and the Hisma valley behind it;
while the importance of the W. Hamd and the extent of the area drained
by its tributaries was for the first time brought to light.

  Exploration in Nejd.

Burckhardt had hoped in 1815 that the advance of the Egyptian expedition
would have given him the opportunity to see something of Nejd, but he
had already left Arabia before the overthrow of the Wahhabi power by
Ibrahim Pasha had opened Nejd to travellers from Hejaz, and though
several European officers accompanied the expedition, none of them left
any record of his experience. It is, however, to the Egyptian conquest
that the first visit of a British traveller to Nejd is due. The Indian
government, wishing to enter into relations with Ibrahim Pasha, as _de
facto_ ruler of Nejd and El Hasa, with a view to putting down piracy in
the Persian Gulf, which was seriously affecting Indian trade, sent a
small mission under Captain G.F. Sadlier to congratulate the pasha on
the success of the Egyptian arms, and no doubt with the ulterior object
of obtaining a first-hand report on the real situation. On his arrival
at Hofuf, Sadlier found that Ibrahim had already left Deraiya, but still
hoping to intercept him before quitting Nejd, he followed up the
retreating Egyptians through Yemama, and Wushm to Ras in Kasim, where he
caught up the main body of Ibrahim's army, though the pasha himself had
gone on to Medina. Sadlier hesitated about going farther, but he was
unable to obtain a safe conduct to Basra, or to return by the way he had
come, and was compelled reluctantly to accompany the army to Medina.
Here he at last met Ibrahim, but though courteously received, the
interview had no results, and Sadlier soon after left for Yambu, whence
he embarked for Jidda, and after another fruitless attempt to treat with
Ibrahim, sailed for India. If the political results of the mission were
_nil_, the value to geographical science was immense; for though no
geographer himself, Sadlier's route across Arabia made it possible for
the first time to locate the principal places in something like their
proper relative positions; incidentally, too, it showed the
practicability of a considerable body of regular troops crossing the
deserts of Nejd even in the months of July and August.

Sadlier's route had left Jebel Shammar to one side; his successor, G.A.
Wallin, was to make that the objective of his journey. Commissioned by
Mehemet Ali to inform him about the situation in Nejd brought about by
the rising power of Abdallah Ibn Rashid, Wallin left Cairo in April
1845, and crossing the pilgrim road at Ma'an, pushed on across the
Syrian desert to the Wadi Sirhan and the Jauf oasis, where he halted
during the hot summer months. From the wells of Shakik he crossed the
waterless Nafud in four days to Jubba, and after a halt there in the
nomad camps, he moved on to Hail, already a thriving town, and the
capital of the Shammar state whose limits included all northern Arabia
from Kasim to the Syrian border. After a stay in Hail, where he had
every opportunity of observing the character of the country and its
inhabitants, and the hospitality and patriarchal, if sometimes stern,
justice of its chief, he travelled on to Medina and Mecca, and returned
thence to Cairo to report to his patron. Early in 1848 he again returned
to Arabia, avoiding the long desert journey by landing at Muwela, thence
striking inland to Tebuk on the pilgrim road, and re-entering Shammar
territory at the oasis of Tema, he again visited Hail; and after
spending a month there travelled northwards to Kerbela and Bagdad.

  Palgrave's journey to Nejd.

The effects of the Egyptian invasion had passed away, and central Arabia
had settled down again under its native rulers when W.G. Palgrave made
his adventurous journey through Nejd, and published the remarkable
narrative which has taken its place as the classic of Arabian
exploration. Like Burton he was once an officer in the Indian army, but
for some time before his journey he had been connected with the Jesuit
mission in Syria. By training and temperament he was better qualified to
appreciate and describe the social life of the people than their
physical surroundings, and if the results of his great journey are
disappointing to the geographer, his account of the society of the oasis
towns, and of the remarkable men who were then ruling in Hail and Riad,
must always possess an absorbing interest as a portrait of Arab life in
its freest development.

Following Wallin's route across the desert by Ma'an and Jauf, Palgrave
and his companion, a Syrian Christian, reached Hail in July 1862; here
they were hospitably entertained by the amir Talal, nephew of the
founder of the Ibn Rashid dynasty, and after some stay passed on with
his countenance through Kasim to southern Nejd. Palgrave says little of
the desert part of the journey or of its Bedouin inhabitants, but much
of the fertility of the oases and of the civility of the townsmen; and
like other travellers in Nejd he speaks with enthusiasm of its bright,
exhilarating climate. At Riad, Fesal, who had been in power since the
Egyptian retirement, was still reigning; and the religious tyranny of
Wahhabism prevailed, in marked contrast to the liberal régime of Talal
in Jebel Shammar. Still, Palgrave and his companions, though known as
Christians, spent nearly two months in the capital without molestation,
making short excursions in the neighbourhood, the most important of
which was to El Kharfa in Aflaj, the most southerly district of Nejd.
Leaving Riad, they passed through Yemama, and across a strip of sandy
desert to El Hasa where Palgrave found himself in more congenial
surroundings. Finally, a voyage to the Oman coast and a brief stay there
brought his adventures in Arabia to a successful ending.

  Doughty.

Charles Doughty, the next Englishman to visit northern Arabia, though he
covered little new ground, saw more of the desert life, and has
described it more minutely and faithfully than any other explorer.
Travelling down from Damascus in 1875 with the Haj caravan, he stopped
at El Hajr, one of the pilgrim stations, with the intention of awaiting
the return of the caravan and in the meantime of exploring the rock-cut
tombs of Medain Salih and El Ala. Having successfully completed his
investigations and sent copies of inscriptions and drawings of the tombs
to Renan in Paris, he determined to push on farther into the desert.
Under the protection of a sheikh of the Fukara Bedouin he wandered over
the whole of the borderland between Hejaz and Nejd. Visiting Tema, where
among other ancient remains he discovered the famous inscribed stone,
afterwards acquired by Huber for the Louvre. Next summer he went on to
Hail and thence back to Khaibar, where the negro governor and townsmen,
less tolerant than his former Bedouin hosts, ill-treated him and even
threatened his life. Returning to Hail in the absence of the amir, he
was expelled by the governor; he succeeded, however, in finding
protection at Aneza, where he spent several months, and eventually after
many hardships and perils found his way to the coast at Jidda.

Three years later Mr Wilfrid and Lady Anne Blunt made their expedition
to J. Shammar. In their previous travels in Syria they had gained the
confidence and friendship of a young sheikh whose family, though long
settled at Tadmur, came originally from Nejd, and who was anxious to
renew the connexion with his kinsmen by seeking a bride among them. In
his company the Blunts set out from Damascus, and travelled across the
Syrian desert by the Wadi Sirhan to Jauf. Here the sheikh found some of
his relations and the matrimonial alliance was soon arranged; but though
the object of the journey had been attained, the Blunts were anxious to
visit Hail and make the acquaintance of the amir Ibn Rashid, of whose
might and generosity they daily heard from their hosts in Jauf. The long
stretch of waterless desert between Jauf and J. Shammar was crossed
without difficulty, and the party was welcomed by the amir and
hospitably entertained for a month, after which they travelled
northwards in company with the Persian pilgrim caravan returning to
Kerbela and Bagdad.

  Huber.

In 1883 the French traveller, C. Huber, accompanied by the
archaeologist, J. Euting, followed the same route from Damascus to Hail.
The narrative of the last named forms a valuable supplement to that
published by the Blunts, and together with Doughty's, furnishes as
complete a picture as could be wished for of the social and political
life of J. Shammar, and of the general nature of the country. Huber's
journal, published after his death from his original notes, contains a
mass of topographical and archaeological detail of the greatest
scientific value: his routes and observations form, in fact, the first
and only scientific data for the construction of the map of northern
Arabia. To archaeology also his services were of equal importance, for,
besides copying numerous inscriptions in the district between Hail and
Tema, he succeeded in gaining possession of the since famous Tema stone,
which ranks with the Moabite stone among the most valuable of Semitic
inscriptions. From Hail Huber followed nearly in Doughty's track to
Aneza and thence across central Nejd to Mecca and Jidda, where he
despatched his notes and copies of inscriptions. A month later, in July
1884, he was murdered by his guides a few marches north of Jidda, on his
way back to Hail.

One other traveller visited Hail during the lifetime of the amir
Mahommed--Baron E. Nolde--who arrived there in 1893, not long after the
amir had by his victory over the combined forces of Riad and Kasim
brought the whole of Nejd under his dominion. Nolde crossed the Nafud to
Haiyania by a more direct track than that from Shakik to Jubba. The amir
was away from his capital settling the affairs of his newly acquired
territory; Nolde therefore, after a short halt at Hail, journeyed on to
Ibn Rashid's camp somewhere in the neighbourhood of Shakra. Here he was
on new ground, but unfortunately he gives little or no description of
his route thither, or of his journey northwards by the Persian pilgrim
road, already traversed by Huber in 1881. His narrative thus, while
containing much of general interest on the climate and on the animal
life of northern Arabia, its horses and camels in particular, adds
little to those of his predecessors as regards topographical detail.

  General results of exploration.

If the journeys detailed above be traced on the map they will be found
to cover the northern half of the peninsula above the line Mecca-Hofuf,
with a network of routes, which, though sometimes separated by wide
intervals, are still close enough to ensure that no important
geographical feature can have been overlooked, especially in a country
whose general character varies so little over wide areas. In the
southern half, on the other hand, except in Nejran and Jauf, no European
traveller has penetrated 100 m. in a direct line from the coast. The
vast extent of the Dahna, or great southern desert, covering perhaps
250,000 sq. m., accounts for about a third of this area, but some of the
most favoured districts in Arabia--Asir and northern Yemen--remain
unexplored, and the hydrography of the Dawasir basin offers some
interesting problems, while a great field remains for the archaeologist
in the seat of the old Sabaean kingdom from Jauf to the Hadramut valley.

    Sinai Peninsula.

  _Topographical Details._--Beginning from the north-west, the Sinai
  peninsula belongs to Egypt, though geographically part of Arabia. It
  is bounded on the E. by a line drawn from Ar Rafa, a few miles E. of
  El Arish on the Mediterranean, to the head of the Gulf of Akaba; and
  on the W. by the Suez Canal; its length from El Arish to its most
  southern point is 240 m., and its breadth from Suez to Akaba is nearly
  160 m. The greater part drains to the Mediterranean, from which the
  land rises gradually to the summit of the Tih plateau. The deep
  depression of Wadi Feran separates the Tih from the higher mass of
  Sinai (q.v.), in which J. Katherine attains a height of 8500 ft.;
  except in W. Feran there is little cultivable land, the greater part
  consisting of bare, rocky hills and sandy valleys, sparsely covered
  with tamarisk and acacia bushes. The Egyptian pilgrim road crosses the
  peninsula from Suez to Akaba, passing the post of An Nakhl, with a
  reservoir and a little cultivation, about half way; a steep descent
  leads down from the edge of the Tih plateau to Akaba.

    Syrian desert.

  The rest of the northern borderland is covered by the Syrian desert,
  extending from the borders of Palestine to the edge of the Euphrates
  valley. This tract, known as the Hamad, is a gravelly plain unbroken
  by any considerable range of hills or any continuous watercourse
  except the Wadi Hauran, which in rainy seasons forms a succession of
  pools from J. Hauran to the Euphrates. Its general slope is to the
  north-east from the volcanic plateau of the Harra south of J. Hauran
  to the edge of the Euphrates valley. The Wadi Sirhan, a broad
  depression some 500 ft. below the average level of the Hamad, crosses
  it from north-east to south-west between Hauran and Jauf; it has a
  nearly uniform height above sea-level of 1850 ft., and appears to be
  the bed of an inland sea rather than a true watercourse. Water is
  found in it a few feet below the surface, and a little cultivation is
  carried on at the small oases of Kaf and Ithri, whence salt produced
  in the neighbouring salt lakes is exported. The W. Sirhan is
  continuous with the depression known as the Jauf, situated on the
  northern edge of the Nefud or Nafud, and the halfway station between
  Damascus and Hail; and it is possible that this depression continues
  eastward towards the Euphrates along a line a little north of the
  thirtieth parallel, where wells and pasturages are known to exist.
  Jauf is a small town consisting, at the time of the Blunts' visit in
  1879, of not more than 500 houses. The town with its gardens,
  surrounded by a mud wall, covers a space of 2 m. in length by half a
  mile in width; the basin in which it lies is barely 3 m. across, and
  except for the palm gardens and a few patches of corn, it is a dead
  flat of white sand, closed in by high sandstone cliffs, beyond which
  lies the open desert. The oases of Sakaka and Kara are situated in a
  similar basin 15 m. to the east; the former a town of 10,000
  inhabitants and somewhat larger than Jauf according to Huber.

    The Nafud.

  A short distance south of Jauf the character of the desert changes
  abruptly from a level black expanse of gravel to the red sands of the
  Nafud. The northern edge of this great desert follows very nearly the
  line of the thirtieth parallel, along which it extends east and west
  for a length of some 400 m.; its breadth from north to south is 200 m.
  Though almost waterless, it is in fact better wooded and richer in
  pasture than any part of the Hamad; the sand-hills are dotted with
  _ghada_, a species of tamarisk, and other bushes, and several grasses
  and succulent plants --among them the _adar_, on which sheep are said
  to feed for a month without requiring water--are found in abundance in
  good seasons. In the spring months, when their camels are in milk, the
  Bedouins care nothing for water, and wander far into the Nafud with
  their flocks in search of the green pasture which springs up
  everywhere after the winter rains. A few wells exist actually in the
  Nafud in the district called El Hajra, near its north-eastern border,
  and along its southern border, between J. Shammar and Tema, there are
  numerous wells and artificial as well as natural reservoirs resorted
  to by the nomad tribes.

  Owing to the great extent of the Nafud desert, the formation of
  sand-dunes is exemplified on a proportionate scale. In many places
  longitudinal dunes are found exceeding a day's journey in length, the
  valleys between which take three or four hours to cross; but the most
  striking feature of the Nafud are the high crescent-shaped sand-hills,
  known locally as _falk_ or _falj_, described by Blunt and Huber, who
  devoted some time to their investigation. The falks enclose a deep
  hollow (known as _ka'r_), the floor of which is often hard soil bare
  of sand, and from which the inner slopes of the falk rise as steeply
  as the sand will lie (about 50°). On the summit of the falk there is
  generally a mound known as _tas_ or _barkhus_ composed of white sand
  which stands out conspicuously against the deep red of the surrounding
  deserts; the exterior slopes are comparatively gentle. The falks are
  singularly uniform in shape, but vary greatly in size; the largest
  were estimated by Huber and Euting at 1¼ m. across and 330 ft. deep.
  They run in strings irregularly from east to west, corresponding in
  this with their individual direction, the convex face of the falk
  being towards the west, i.e. the direction of the prevailing wind, and
  the cusps to leeward. In the south of the Nafud, where Huber found the
  prevailing wind to be from the south, the falks are turned in that
  direction. Though perhaps subject to slight changes in the course of
  years, there is no doubt that these dunes are practically permanent
  features; the more prominent ones serve as landmarks and have
  well-known distinctive names. The character of the vegetation which
  clothes their slopes shows that even superficial changes must be
  slight. The general level of the Nafud was found by Huber's
  observations to be about 3000 ft. above sea-level; the highest point
  on the Jauf-Hail route is at Falk Alam, the rocky peaks of which rise
  200 or 300 ft. above the surface of the sand. Other peaks cropping out
  of the Nafud are Jebel Tawil, near the wells of Shakik, and J. Abrak
  Rada, a long black ridge in the middle of the desert.

    The Harra.

  The high plateau which from. J. Hauran southward forms the main
  watershed of the peninsula is covered in places by deep beds of lava,
  which from their hardness have preserved the underlying sandstones
  from degradation, and now stand up considerably above the general
  level. These tracts are known as _harra_; the most remarkable is the
  Harrat El Awerid, west of the Haj route from Tebuk to El Ala, a
  mountain mass 100 m. in length with an average height of over 5000
  ft., and the highest summit of which, J. Anaz, exceeds 7000 ft. The
  harra east of Khaibar is also of considerable extent, and the same
  formation is found all along the Hejaz border from Medina to the Jebel
  el Kura, east of Mecca. The surface of the harra is extremely broken,
  forming a labyrinth of lava crags and blocks of every size; the whole
  region is sterile and almost waterless, and compared with the Nafud it
  produces little vegetation; but it is resorted to by the Bedouin in
  the spring and summer months when the air is always fresh and cool. In
  winter it is cold and snow often lies for some time.

    Hejaz.

  Hejaz, if we except the Taif district in the south, which is properly
  a part of the Yemen plateau, forms a well-marked physical division,
  lying on the western slope of the peninsula, where that slope is at
  its widest, between the Harra and the Red Sea. A high range of granite
  hills, known as the Tehama range, the highest point of which, J. Shar,
  in Midian, exceeds 6500 ft., divides it longitudinally into a narrow
  littoral and a broader upland zone 2000 or 3000 ft. above the sea.
  Both are generally bare and unproductive, the uplands, however,
  contain the fertile valleys of Khaibar and Medina, draining to the
  Wadi Hamd, the principal river system of western Arabia; and the Wadi
  Jadid or Es Safra, rising in the Harra between Medina and Es Safina,
  which contain several settlements, of which the principal produce is
  dates. The quartz reefs which crop out in the granite ranges of the
  Tehama contain traces of gold. These and the ancient copper workings
  were investigated by Burton in 1877. The richer veins had evidently
  been long ago worked out, and nothing of sufficient value to justify
  further outlay was discovered. The coast-line is fringed with small
  islets and shoals and reefs, which make navigation dangerous. The only
  ports of importance are Yambu and Jidda, which serve respectively
  Medina and Mecca; they depend entirely on the pilgrim traffic to the
  holy cities, without which they could not exist.

    Nejd.

  The great central province of Nejd occupies all inner Arabia between
  the Nafud and the southern desert. Its northern part forms the basin
  of the Wadi Rumma, which, rising in the Khaibar harra, runs
  north-eastward across the whole width of Nejd, till it is lost in the
  sands of the eastern Nafud, north of Aneza. The greater portion of
  this region is an open steppe, sandy in places and in others dotted
  with low volcanic hills, but with occasional ground water and in
  favourable seasons furnishing support for a considerable pastoral
  population. Its elevation varies from about 5000 ft. in the west to
  2500 ft. in the east. In Jebel Shammar, Kasim and Wushm, where the
  water in the wadi beds rises nearly to the ground level, numerous
  fertile oases are found with thriving villages and towns.

  Jebel Shammar, from which the northern district of Nejd takes its
  name, is a double range of mountains some 20 m. apart, rising sharply
  out of the desert in bare, granite cliffs. J. Aja, the western and
  higher of the two ranges, has a length of about 100 m. from north-east
  to south-west, where it merges into the high plateau extending from
  and continuous with the Khaibar harra. The highest point, J. Kara,
  near its north-eastern extremity, is about 4600 ft. above sea-level,
  or 1600 ft. above the town of Hail, which, like most of the larger
  villages, lies along the wadi bed at the foot of J. Aja. The town,
  which has risen with the fortunes of the Ibn Rashid family to be the
  capital of Upper Nejd, is at the mouth of the valley between the twin
  ranges, about 2 m. from the foot of J. Aja, and contained at the time
  of Nolde's visit in 1893 about 12,000 inhabitants.

  The principal tributaries of the W. Rumma converge in lower Kasim, and
  at Aneza Doughty says its bed is 3 m. wide from bank to bank. Forty
  years before his visit a flood is said to have occurred, which passed
  down the river till it was blocked by sand-drifts at Thuwerat, 50 m.
  lower down, and for two years a lake stood nearly 100 m. long, crowded
  by waterfowl not known before in that desert country. Below this its
  course has not been followed by any European traveller, but it may be
  inferred from the line of watering-places on the road to Kuwet, that
  it runs out to the Persian Gulf in that neighbourhood.

  East of Kasim the land rises gradually to the high plateau culminating
  in the ranges of Jebel Tuwek and J. Arid. The general direction of
  these hills is from north-west to south-east. On the west they rise
  somewhat steeply, exposing high cliffs of white limestone, which
  perhaps gave Palgrave the impression that the range is of greater
  absolute height than is actually the case. J. Tuwek in any case forms
  an important geographical feature in eastern Nejd, interrupting by a
  transverse barrier 200 m. in length the general north-easterly slope
  of the peninusla, and separating the basin of the W. Rumma from that
  of the other great river system of central Arabia, the Wadi Dawasir.
  The districts of Suder and Wushm lie on its northern side, Arid in the
  centre, and Aflaj, Harik and Yemama on its south, in the basin of the
  W. Dawasir; the whole of this hilly region of eastern Nejd is,
  perhaps, rather a rolling down country than truly mountainous, in
  which high pastures alternate with deep fertile valleys, supporting
  numerous villages with a large agricultural population. The W. Hanifa
  is its principal watercourse; its course is marked by an almost
  continuous series of palm groves and settlements, among which Deraiya
  the former, and Riad the present, capital of the Ibn Saud kingdom are
  the most extensive. Its lower course is uncertain, but it probably
  continues in a south-east direction to the districts of El Harik and
  Yemama when, joined by the drainage from Aflaj and the W. Dawasir, it
  runs eastward till it disappears in the belt of sandy desert 100 m. in
  width that forms the eastern boundary of Nejd, to reappear in the
  copious springs that fertilize El Hasa and the Bahrein littoral.

    Unexplored region of S. Nejd.

  As regards the unexplored southern region, Palgrave's informants in
  Aflaj, the most southerly district visited by him, stated that a day's
  march south of that place the Yemen road enters the W. Dawasir, up
  which it runs for ten days, perhaps 200 m., to El Kura, a thinly
  peopled district on the borders of Asir; this accords with the
  information of the French officers of the Egyptian army in that
  district, and with that of Halévy, who makes all the drainage from
  Nejran northward run to the same great wadi. Whether there be any
  second line of drainage in southern Nejd skirting the edge of the
  great desert and following the depression of the W. Yabrin must remain
  a matter of conjecture. Colonel Miles concluded, from his enquiries,
  that the low salt swamp, extending inland for some distance from Khor
  ed Duwan, in the bay east of El Katr, was the outlet of an extensive
  drainage system which may well be continuous with the W. Yabrin and
  extend far into the interior, if not to Nejran itself.

    El Hasa.

  East of Nejd a strip of sandy desert 50 m. in width extends almost
  continuously from the great Nafud to the Dahna. East of this again a
  succession of stony ridges running parallel to the coast has to be
  crossed before El Hasa is reached. This province, which skirts the
  Persian Gulf from the mouth of the Euphrates to the frontiers of Oman,
  is low and hot; its shores are flat, and with the exception of Kuwet
  at the north-west corner of the gulf, it possesses no deep water
  port. North of Katif it is desert and only inhabited by nomads; at
  Katif, however, and throughout the district to the south bordering on
  the Gulf of Bahrein there are ample supplies of underground water,
  welling up in abundant springs often at a high temperature, and
  bringing fertility to an extensive district of which El Hofuf, a town
  of 15,000 to 20,000 inhabitants, is the most important centre.

    South-western Arabia.

  South-western Arabia, from the twenty-first parallel down to the Gulf
  of Aden, including the Taif district of Hejaz, Asir and Yemen, forms
  one province geographically. Throughout its length it consists of
  three zones, a narrow coastal strip, rarely exceeding 20 m. in width,
  a central mountainous tract, embracing the great chain which runs
  parallel to the coast from near Taif to within 50 m. of Aden, and an
  inner plateau falling gradually to the north-east till it merges in
  the Nejd steppes or the sands of the great desert.

  The lowland strip or Tehama consists partly of a gravelly plain, the
  _Khabt_, covered sparsely with acacia and other desert shrubs and
  trees, and furnishing pasturage for large flocks of goats and camels;
  and partly of sterile wastes of sand like the _Ramla_, which extends
  on either side of Aden almost from the seashore to the foot of the
  hills. The Tehama is, however, by no means all desert, the mountain
  torrents where they debouch into the plain have formed considerable
  tracts of alluvial soil of the highest degree of fertility producing
  in that warm equable climate two and even three crops in the year. The
  flood-water is controlled by a system of dams and channels constructed
  so as to utilize every drop, and the extent of cultivation is limited
  more by the supply of water available than by the amount of suitable
  soil. These districts support a large settled population and several
  considerable towns, of which Bet el Fakih and Zubed in the western and
  Lahej in the southern Tehama, with 4000 to 6000 inhabitants, are the
  most important. There are signs that this coastal strip was until a
  geologically recent period below sea-level; and that the coast-line is
  still receding is evidenced by the history of the town of Muza, once a
  flourishing port, now 20 m. inland; while Bet el Fakih and Zubed, once
  important centres of the coffee trade, have lost their position
  through the silting up of the ports which formerly served them.

  The jebel or mountain-land is, however, the typical Yemen, the _Arabia
  Felix_ of the ancients. Deep valleys winding through the barren
  foothills lead gradually up to the higher mountains, and as the track
  ascends the scenery and vegetation change their character; the trees
  which line the banks of the wadi are overgrown with creepers, and the
  running stream is dammed at frequent intervals, and led off in
  artificial channels to irrigate the fields on either side; the steeper
  parts of the road are paved with large stones, substantially built
  villages, with their masonry towers or _dars_, crowning every height,
  replace the collection of mud walls and brushwood huts of the low
  country; while tier above tier, terraced fields cover the hill slopes
  and attest the industry of the inhabitants and the fertility of their
  mountains. On the main route from Hodeda to Sana the first coffee
  plantations are reached at Usil, at an altitude of 4300 ft., and
  throughout the western slopes of the range up to an altitude of 7000
  ft. it is the most important crop. Jebel Haraz, of which Manakha, a
  small town of 3000 inhabitants is the chief place, is described by
  Glaser as one vast coffee garden. Here the traveller ascending from
  the coast sees the first example of the jebel or highland towns, with
  their high three-storeyed houses, built of quarried stone, their
  narrow façades pierced with small windows with whitewashed borders and
  ornamented with varied arabesque patterns; each dar has the appearance
  of a small castle complete in itself, and the general effect is rather
  that of a cluster of separate forts than of a town occupied by a
  united community.

  The scenery in this mountain region is of the most varied description;
  bare precipitous hill-sides seamed with dry, rocky watercourses give
  place with almost startling rapidity to fertile slopes, terraced
  literally for thousands of feet. General Haig in describing them says:
  "One can hardly realize the enormous labour, toil and perseverance
  that these represent; the terrace walls are usually 5 to 8 ft. in
  height, but towards the top of the mountains they are sometimes as
  much as 15 or 18 ft.; they are built entirely of rough stone without
  mortar, and I reckon that on an average each wall retains not more
  than twice its own height in breadth, and I do not think I saw a
  single break in them unrepaired."

  The highest summits as determined by actual survey are between 10,000
  and 11,000 ft. above sea-level. J. Sabur, a conspicuous mass in the
  extreme south, is 9900 ft., with a fall to the Taiz valley of 5000
  ft.; farther north several points in the mountains above Ibb and Yarim
  attain a height of 10,500 ft., and J. Hadur, near the Sana-Hodeda
  road, exceeds 10,000 ft. From the crest of the range there is a short
  drop of 2000 or 3000 ft. to the broad open valleys which form the
  principal feature of the inner plateau. The town of Yarim lies near
  its southern extremity at an altitude of about 8000 ft.; within a
  short distance are the sources of the W. Yakla, W. Bana and W. Zubed,
  running respectively east and south and west. The first named is a dry
  watercourse ultimately joining the basin of the W. Hadramut; the two
  others run for a long distance through fertile valleys and, like many
  of the wadis on the seaward side of the range, have perennial streams
  down to within a few miles of the sea. Sana, the capital of Yemen,
  lies in a broad valley 7300 ft. above sea-level, sloping northwards to
  the W. Kharid which, with the Ghail Hirran, the sources of which are
  on the eastern slopes of J. Hadur, run north-eastward to the Jauf
  depression. The Arhab district, through which these two great wadis
  run, was formerly the centre of the Himyar kingdom; cultivation is now
  only to be found in the lower parts on the borders of the
  watercourses, all above being naked rock from which every particle of
  soil has been denuded. In the higher parts there are fine plains where
  Glaser found numerous Himyaritic remains, and which he considers were
  undoubtedly cultivated formerly, but they have long fallen out of
  cultivation owing to denudation and desiccation--the impoverishment of
  the country from these causes is increasing. Eastward the plateau
  becomes still more sterile, and its elevation probably falls more
  rapidly till it reaches the level of the Jauf and Nejran valleys on
  the borders of the desert. The water-parting between central and
  southern Arabia seems to be somewhere to the south of Nejran, which,
  according to Halévy, drains northward to the W. Dawasir, while the
  Jauf is either an isolated depression, or perhaps forms part of the
  Hadramut basin.

    Asir.

  Farther north, in Asir, the plateau is more mountainous and contains
  many fertile valleys. Of these may be mentioned Khamis Mishet and the
  Wadi Shahran rising among the high summits of the maritime chain, and
  the principal affluents of the Wadi Besha; the latter is a broad
  well-watered valley, with numerous scattered hamlets, four days'
  journey (perhaps 80 m.) from the crest of the range. Still farther
  north is the Wadi Taraba and its branches running down from the
  highland district of Zahran. The lower valleys produce dates in
  abundance, and at higher elevations wheat, barley, millets and
  excellent fruit are grown, while juniper forests are said to cover the
  mountain slopes. In Yemen this tree was probably more common formerly;
  the place-name Arar, signifying juniper, is still often found where
  the tree no longer exists.

    Coast of Yemen.

    Hadramut.

  The western coast of Yemen, like that of Hejaz, is studded with shoals
  and islands, of which Perim in the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, Kamaran,
  the Turkish quarantine post, 40 m. north of Hodeda, and the Farsan
  group, off the Abu Arish coast, are the principal. Hodeda is the only
  port of any importance since the days of steamships began; the other
  ports, Mokha, Lohaia and Kanfuda merely share in the coasting trade.
  The south coast is free from the shoals that imperil the navigation of
  the Red Sea, and in Aden it possesses the only safe natural harbour on
  the route between Suez and India. Several isolated volcanic hills crop
  out on the shore line between Aden and the straits; the most
  remarkable are J. Kharaz, 2500 ft., and J. Shamshan, 1700 ft., at the
  base of which Aden itself is built. In both of these the crater form
  is very clearly marked. A low maritime plain, similar to the Tehama of
  the western coast, extends for some 200 m. east of the Straits of
  Bab-el-Mandeb, backed by mountains rising to 7000 ft. or more; farther
  east the elevation of the highland decreases steadily, and in the
  Hadramut, north of Mukalla, does not much exceed 4000 ft. The mountain
  chain, too, is less distinctly marked, and becomes little more than
  the seaward escarpment of the plateau which intervenes between the
  coast and the Hadramut valley. This valley runs nearly east and west
  for a distance of 500 m. from the eastern slopes of the Yemen
  highlands to its mouth on the Mahra coast near Sihut. The greater part
  of it is desert, but a short stretch lying between the 48th and 50th
  meridians is well watered and exceptionally fertile. This begins a
  little to the east of Shabwa, the ancient capital, now half buried in
  the advancing sand, and for a distance of over 70 m. a succession of
  villages and towns surrounded by fields and date groves extends along
  the main valley and into the tributaries which join it from the south.
  Shibam, Saiyun and Tarim are towns of 6000 or more inhabitants, and
  Hajren and Haura in the W. Duwan are among the larger villages.
  Himyaritic remains have been found here and in the W. Mefat which
  enters the Gulf of Aden near Balhaf. A few small fishing villages or
  ports are scattered along the coast, but except Mukalla and Shihr none
  is of any importance.

  The Gara coast was visited by the Bents, who went inland from Dhafar,
  one of the centres of the old frankincense trade, to the crest of the
  plateau. The narrow coastal strip seems to be moderately fertile, and
  the hills which in places come down to the seashore are covered with
  trees, among which the frankincense and other gum-bearing trees are
  found. On the plateau, which has an altitude of 4000 ft., there is
  good pasturage; inland the country slopes gently to a broad valley
  beyond which the view was bounded by the level horizon of the desert.

    Oman.

  Oman (q.v.) includes all the south-eastern corner of the peninsula.
  Its chief feature is the lofty range of J. Akhdar, 10,000 ft. above
  sea-level. Like the great range of western Arabia, it runs parallel to
  the coast; it differs, however, from the western range in that its
  fall on the landward side is as abrupt and nearly as great as on its
  seaward side. Its northern extremity, Ras Musandan, rises
  precipitously from the straits of Hormuz; farther south the range
  curves inland somewhat, leaving a narrow but fertile strip, known as
  the Batina coast, between it and the sea, and containing several
  populous towns and villages of which Sohar, Barka and Sib are the
  chief. Muscat, the capital of the province and the principal port on
  the coast, is surrounded on three sides by bare, rocky hills, and has
  the reputation of being the hottest place in Arabia. Zwemer says the
  fertility of the highland region of J. Akhdar is wonderful and is in
  striking contrast to the barrenness of so much of the coast; water
  issues in perennial springs from many rocky clefts, and is carefully
  husbanded by the ingenuity of the people; underground channels, known
  here as _faluj_, precisely similar to the _kanat_ or _karez_ of Persia
  and Afghanistan, are also largely used. The principal villages on the
  eastern slopes are Rustak, Nakhl and Semail in the well-watered valley
  of the same name; on the western slopes are Tanuf and Nizwa, lying
  immediately below the highest summit of the range; Semed, Ibra and
  Bidiya in the W. Betha are all well-built villages with palm-groves
  and irrigated fields. In the north-west the Dhahira district sloping
  towards the Jewasimi coast is more steppe-like in character; but there
  two oases of great fertility are found, of which Birema, visited by
  both Miles and Zwemer, supports a population of 15,000. West of Abu
  Dhabi a low flat steppe with no settled inhabitants extends up to the
  Katr peninsula, merging on the north into the saline marshes which
  border the Persian Gulf, and on the south into the desert.

    The southern desert.

  The great desert known as the Dahna or the Rub'a el Khali ("the empty
  quarter") is believed to cover all the interior of southern Arabia
  from the borders of Yemen in the west to those of Oman in the east.
  Halévy in Nejran, Von Wrede in Hadramut, and Wellsted in Oman reached
  its edge, though none of them actually entered it, and the guides
  accompanying them all concurred in describing it as uninhabitable and
  uncrossed by any track. Its northern fringe is no doubt frequented by
  the Bedouin tribes of southern Nejd after the rains, when its sands,
  like those of the northern desert, produce herbage; but towards the
  east, according to Burckhardt's information, it is quite without
  vegetation even in the winter and spring. The farthest habitable spot
  to the south of Nejd is the Wadi Yabrin, which L. Pelly heard of from
  the Ahl Murra Bedouins as once a fertile district, and which still
  produces dates, though, owing to malaria, it is now deserted; thence
  southward to the Hadramut valley no communication is known to exist.

  [_Geology._--The geological structure of Arabia is very similar to
  that of Egypt. The oldest rocks consist of granite and schist,
  penetrated by intrusive dykes, and upon this foundation rest the
  flat-lying sedimentary deposits, beginning with a sandstone like the
  Nubian sandstone of Egypt. In the northern part of Arabia the
  crystalline rocks form a broad area extending from the peninsula of
  Sinai eastwards to Hail and southwards at least as far as Mecca.
  Towards the north the crystalline floor is overlaid by the great
  sandstone series which covers nearly the whole of the country north of
  Hail. Upon the sandstone rest a few scattered outliers of limestone,
  probably of Cretaceous age, the largest of which occur near Jauf and
  east of Bureda. Over both sandstone and granite great sheets of lava
  have been poured, and these, protecting the softer beds beneath from
  further denudation, now stand up as the high plateaus and hills called
  _harra_. Volcanic cones still exist in large numbers, and the sheets
  of lava appear as fresh as any recent flows of Etna or Vesuvius.
  Arabian manuscripts describe an eruption on the harra near Medina in
  A.D. 1256. In the south of Arabia the crystalline floor appears at
  intervals along the southern coast and on the shores of the Gulf of
  Oman. At Marbat the granite is overlaid by sandstone, presumably the
  Nubian sandstone: this is followed by marls containing Cenomanian
  fossils; and these are overlaid by Upper Cretaceous limestones, upon
  which rest isolated patches of _Alveolina_ limestone. Generally,
  however, the Cretaceous beds do not appear, and the greater part of
  southern Arabia seems to be formed of _Alveolina_ and nummulite
  limestones of Tertiary age. An extinct volcano occurs at Aden, and
  volcanic rocks are found at other places near the Straits of
  Bab-el-Mandeb. Throughout the whole of Arabia, so far as is known, the
  sedimentary beds show no signs of any but the most gentle folding.
  Faulting, however, is by no means absent, and some of the faults are
  of considerable magnitude. The Gulf of Akaba is a strip of country
  which has been let down between two parallel faults, and several
  similar faulted troughs occur in the Sinai peninsula. The Red Sea
  itself is a great trough bounded by faults along each side.]

  _Climate._--Owing to its low latitude and generally arid surface,
  Arabia is on the whole one of the hottest regions of the earth; this
  is especially the case along the coasts of the Persian Gulf and the
  southern half of the Red Sea, where the moist heat throughout the year
  is almost intolerable to Europeans. In the interior of northern and
  central Arabia, however, where the average level of the country
  exceeds 3000 ft., the fiery heat of the summer days is followed by
  cool nights, and the winter climate is fresh and invigorating; while
  in the highlands of Asir and Yemen in the south-west, and of Oman in
  the east, the summer heat is never excessive, and the winters are,
  comparatively speaking, cold.

  In the northern desert the temperature is subject to extreme
  variations. Nolde states that on the 1st of February 1893 in the
  desert north of Hail the thermometer fell from 78° a little before
  sunset to 18° a quarter of an hour after. The midday temperatures
  recorded by Huber at Hail during January and the first half of
  February average about 65° F., and water froze on several nights; at
  Medina the winters are cold and night frosts of frequent occurrence,
  and these conditions prevail over all the western part of the Nejd
  plateau. In the east where the elevation is lower the climate is
  warmer. In the elevated highland district which extends from Taif to
  within 50 m. of Aden, the summer heat is tempered by the monsoon
  winds, and the seasonal variation of temperature is less marked. From
  observations made at Sana by Manzoni, Deflers and Glaser, the mean
  temperature for the year of that city at an altitude of 7300 ft. and
  in 15° 22' N. appears to be 60° F.; for July the mean maximum was 77°,
  mean minimum 54°; for January the figures were 62°and 40°
  respectively, the lowest recorded temperature in 1878 was 26.6° on the
  26th of January. At Aden at the sea-level the mean temperature for the
  year is 83°; the highest observed temperature in 1904 was 97.3°, the
  lowest 67.4°.

  The rainfall throughout northern and central Arabia is chiefly in the
  winter months between October and April, and is scanty and irregular.
  Doughty states that in 1876 rain to wet the ground had not fallen for
  three years at Medain Salih; in that year showers fell on the 29th of
  December and on two days in January and again in March. After a very
  hot summer the bright weather changed to clouded skies on the 2nd of
  October, rain fell tempestuously the same evening, and there were
  showery days and nights till the 14th. The autumn rains fell that year
  abundantly in the Nafud towards Jauf, but very little in the basin of
  the W. Hamd (on the western slope). Doughty adds that the Nejd
  highlands between Kasim and Mecca are watered yearly by seasonable
  rains, which at Taif are expected about the end of August and last
  commonly from four to six weeks. This appears to be about the northern
  limit reached by the south-west monsoon, which from June to September
  brings a fairly abundant rainfall to the Yemen highlands, though the
  Tehama remains almost entirely rainless. The rainfall is heaviest
  along the western fringe of the plateau, and penetrates inland in
  decreasing quantity over a zone which perhaps extends to 100 m. in
  width. In good seasons it is sufficient for the cultivation of the
  summer crop of millet, and for the supply of the perennial streams and
  springs, on which the irrigation of the winter crops of wheat and
  barley depend. The amount measured at Dhala at the extreme south of
  the plateau at an elevation of 4800 ft. was in 1902 as follows:--June,
  4.0 in.; July, 5.5; August, 5.8; September, 1.9. Only slight showers
  were recorded in the other months of the year. At higher elevations
  the rainfall is no doubt heavier; Manzoni mentions that at Sana there
  was constant rain throughout August and September 1878, and that the
  thermometer during August did not reach 65°. In the Tehama occasional
  showers fall during the winter months; at Aden the average rainfall
  for the year is 2.97 in., but during 1904 only 0.5 in. was recorded.
  Snow falls on the Harra and on the Tehama range in northern Arabia,
  and Nolde records a fall of snow which lay on the Nafud on the 1st of
  February 1893. It also falls on J. Akhdar in Oman, but is very rarely
  known on the Yemen mountains, probably because the precipitation
  during the winter months is so slight.

  The prevailing winds in northern Arabia as far as is known are from
  the west; along the southern coast they are from the east; at Sana
  there is generally a light breeze from the north-north-west from 9 to
  11 A.M., from noon till 4 P.M. a steady and often strong wind blows
  from the south-south-east, which dies away later. The climate is
  extremely dry, but this is compensated for by the heavy mists which
  sweep up from the plains during the rainless months and exercise a
  most beneficial effect in the coffee-growing districts. This
  phenomenon is known as the sukhemani or amama. In the morning the
  Tehama, as seen from the mountain tops, appears buried in a sea of
  white cloud; towards noon the clouds drift up the mountain slopes and
  cover the summits with wreaths of light mist charged with moisture
  which condenses on the trees and vegetation; in the afternoon they
  disappear, and the evenings are generally clear and still.

  _Fauna._--The wild animals of Arabia are all of the desert-loving
  type: antelopes and gazelles are found in small numbers throughout the
  peninsula; the latter are similar to the _chikara_ or ravine deer of
  India. The larger antelopes, so common on the African side of the Gulf
  of Aden, are not found, except one variety, the _Oryx beatrix_ (called
  by the Arabs, wild cow), which is an inhabitant of the Nafud between
  Tema and Hail; it is about the size of a donkey, white, and with long
  straight horns. Hares are numerous both in the desert and in
  cultivated tracts. In the Yemen mountains the _wal_, a wild goat with
  massive horns, similar to the Kashmir ibex, is found; monkeys also
  abound. Among smaller animals the jerboa and other descriptions of
  rat, and the _wabar_ or cony are common; lizards and snakes are
  numerous, most of the latter being venomous. Hyenas, wolves and
  panthers are found in most parts of the country, and in the mountains
  the leopard and wild cat. Of birds the ostrich is found in the Nafud
  and in the W. Dawasir. Among game birds the bustard, guinea fowl, sand
  grouse (_kata_), blue rock, green pigeon, partridge, including a large
  chikor (_akb_) and a small species similar to the Punjab sisi; quail
  and several kinds of duck and snipe are met with. In the cultivated
  parts of Yemen and Tehama small birds are very numerous, so also are
  birds of prey, vultures, kites and hawks.

  Insects of all sorts abound; scorpions, centipedes, spiders, and an
  ugly but harmless millipede known in Yemen as _hablub_ are very common
  in summer. Ants and beetles too are very numerous, and anthills are
  prominent features in many places. Locusts appear in great swarms and
  do much damage; fires are lighted at night to attract them, and large
  quantities are caught and eaten by the poorer people. Bees are kept,
  and in Yemen and Hadramut the honey is exceptionally good.

    Camel.

  Of domesticated animals the camel is far the most useful to the Arab.
  Owing to its endurance of thirst the long desert journeys which
  separate the populous centres are made practicable, and in the spring
  months, when green forage is plentiful in the desert, the Bedouins
  pitch their camps for long periods far from any water, and not only
  men but horses subsist on camel's milk. The Arabian camel belongs to
  the one-humped species, though there are many varieties differing in
  appearance as much as the thoroughbred race-horse from the English
  cart-horse. The ordinary load for a pack camel is about 400 lb., and
  in hot weather good camels will march 20 to 25 m. daily and only
  require water every third or fourth day: in cool weather, with ample
  green fodder they can go twenty-five days or more without drinking. A
  good _dalul_ or riding camel will carry his rider 100 m. a day for a
  week on end. Nolde gives an instance from his own experience of a
  camel rider covering 62 m. in seven hours. The pure-bred riding camel
  is only found in perfection in inner Arabia; for some unexplained
  reason when taken out of their own country or north of the 30th degree
  they rapidly degenerate.

    Horse.

  The horse does not occupy the important position in the Bedouin
  economy that is popularly supposed. In Nejd the number of horses is,
  comparatively speaking, very small; the want of water in the Nafud
  where alone forage is obtainable, and the absence of forage in the
  neighbourhood of the towns makes horse-breeding on a large scale
  impracticable there. Horses are in fact only kept by the principal
  sheiks, and by far the larger proportion of those now in Nejd are the
  property of the amir and his family. These are kept most of the year
  in the Nafud, five or ten days' march from Hail, where they find their
  own food on the desert herbage. When a raid is in contemplation, they
  are brought in and given a little barley for a few weeks. Reared in
  this way they are capable of marvellous endurance, marching during a
  raid twenty hours a day for eight or ten days together. As a rule,
  they are only mounted at the moment of attack, or in pursuit. Water
  and forage have to be carried for them on camels.

  The great majority of the horses that come into the market as Arabs,
  are bred in the northern desert and in Mesopotamia, by the various
  sections of the Aneza and Shammar tribes, who emigrated from Nejd
  generations ago, taking with them the original Nejd stock. In size and
  appearance, and in everything but endurance, these northern horses are
  admittedly superior to the true Nejdi. A few of the latter are
  collected by dealers in the nomad camps and exported chiefly from
  Kuwet. The amir Mahommed Ibn Rashid used to send down about one
  hundred young horses yearly.

  Asses of excellent quality are bred all over the country; they are
  much used as mounts by the richer townsmen. Except in the settled
  districts horned cattle are not numerous; they are similar to the
  Indian humped cattle, but are greatly superior in milking qualities.
  The great wealth of the Arabs is in their flocks of sheep and goats;
  they are led out to pasture soon after sunrise, and in the hotter
  months drink every second day. In the spring when the succulent
  _ashub_ and _adar_ grow plentifully in the desert, they go for weeks
  without drinking. They are milked once a day about sunset by the women
  (the men milk the camels), and a large proportion of the milk is made
  into _samn_, clarified butter, or _marisi_, dried curd. The wool is
  not of much value, and is spun by the women and woven into rugs, and
  made up into saddlebags or into the black Bedouin tents.

  _Flora._--The flora of Arabia has been investigated by P. Forskal, the
  botanist of Niebuhr's mission, P.E. Botta, G. Schweinfurth and A.
  Deflers, to whose publications the technical reader is referred. Its
  general type approaches more closely to the African than to that of
  southern Asia. In the higher regions the principal trees are various
  species of fig, tamarind, carob and numerous kinds of cactiform
  _Euphorbia_, of which one, the _Euphorbia arborea_, grows to a height
  of 20 ft. Of Coniferae the juniper is found on the higher slopes of J.
  Sabur near Taiz, where Botta describes it as forming an extensive
  forest and growing to a large size; it is also found in the range
  overlooking the W. Madin, 50 m. W. of Aden. Considerable forests are
  said to exist in Asir, and Burton found a few fine specimens which he
  regarded as the remains of an old forest, on the Tehama range in
  Midian. On the rocky hill-sides in Yemen the _Adenium Obesum_ is
  worthy of notice, with its enormous bulb-like stems and brilliant red
  flowers. Some fine aloes or agaves are also found. In the cultivated
  upland valleys all over Arabia the _Zisyphus jujuba_, called by some
  travellers lotus, grows to a large tree; its thorny branches are
  clipped yearly and used to fence the cornfields among which it grows.
  In the broad sandy wadi beds the tamarisk (_athl_) is everywhere
  found; its wood is used for making domestic implements of all sorts.
  Among fruit trees the vine, apricot, peach, apple, quince, fig and
  banana are cultivated in the highlands, and in the lower country the
  date palm flourishes, particularly throughout the central zone of
  Arabia, in Hejaz, Nejd and El Hasa, where it is the prime article of
  food. A hundred kinds of date are said to grow at Medina, of which the
  _birni_ is considered the most wholesome; the _halwa_ and the _jalebi_
  are the most delicately flavoured and sell at very high rates; the
  _khulas_ of El Hasa is also much esteemed.

  Of cereals the common millets, _dhura_ and _dukhn_, are grown in all
  parts of the country as the summer crop, and in the hot irrigated
  Tehama districts three crops are reaped in the year; in the highlands
  maize, wheat and barley are grown to a limited extent as the winter
  crop, ripening at the end of March or in April. Among vegetables the
  common kinds grown include radishes, pumpkins, cucumbers, melons,
  potatoes, onions and leeks. Roses are grown in some places for the
  manufacture of _atr_, or attar of roses; mignonette, jasmine, thyme,
  lavender and other aromatic plants are favourites in Yemen, when the
  Arabs often stick a bunch in their head-dress.

    Coffee.

  Of the products special to Arabia coffee comes first; it is nowhere
  found wild, and is believed to have been introduced from Abyssinia in
  the 6th century A.D. It thrives on the seaward slopes of the western
  range in the zone of the tropical rains, at altitudes between 4000 and
  7000 ft. The principal centres of production are the upper valleys of
  the W. Surdad, between Kaukaban and Manakha, and particularly on J.
  Haraz; in the Wadi Zubed west of Uden; in Hajaria on the slopes of J.
  Sabur, and in the Yafa district north-east of Aden. It is planted in
  terraces on the mountain slopes; shady trees, such as tamarind and
  fig, are planted in the border as a protection from the sun, and the
  terraces are irrigated by channels led from a neighbouring rivulet or
  spring. The plants are raised from seedlings, and when six or seven
  weeks old they are transplanted in rows 4 to 6 ft. apart; they require
  watering twice a month, and bear in two to four years. The berries are
  dried in the sun and sent down to Hodeda or Aden, where they are
  subjected to a process for separating the husk from the bean; the
  result is about 50% of cleaned berries, _bun safi_, which is exported,
  and a residue of husk or _kishr_, from which the Yemenis make their
  favourite beverage.

  Another plant universally used as a stimulant in Southern Arabia is
  _khat_ (_Catha edulis_). The best is grown on J. Sabur and the
  mountainous country round Taiz. It is a small bush propagated from
  cuttings which are left to grow for three years; the leaves are then
  stripped, except a few buds which develop next year into young shoots,
  these being cut and sold in bunches under the name of _khat mubarak_;
  next year on the branches cut back new shoots grow; these are sold as
  _khat malhani_, or second-year kat, which commands the highest price.
  The bush is then left for three years, when the process is repeated.
  The leaves and young shoots are chewed; they have stimulating
  properties, comparable with those of the coca of Peru.

  The aromatic gums for which Arabia was famed in ancient times are
  still produced, though the trade is a very small one. The tree from
  which myrrh is extracted grows in many places, but the industry is
  chiefly carried on at Suda, 60 m. north-north-east of Sana.
  Longitudinal slits are made in the bark, and the gum is caught in cups
  fixed beneath. The balsam of Mecca is produced in the same way,
  chiefly in the mountains near the W. Safra between Yambu and Medina.

  The stony plains which cover so large a part of the country are often
  covered with acacia jungle, and in the dry water-courses a kind of
  wild palm, the _dom_, abounds, from the leaves of which baskets and
  mats are woven. Brushwood and rough pasturage of some sort is found
  almost everywhere, except in the neighbourhood of the larger
  settlements, where forage and firewood have to be brought in from long
  distances. The Nafud sands, too, are tufted in many places with bushes
  or small trees, and after the winter rains they produce excellent
  pasture.

_Population._--The people, according to their own traditions, are
derived from two stocks, the pure Arabs, descended from Kahtan or
Joktan, fourth in descent from Shem; and the Mustarab or naturalized
Arabs, from Ishmael. The former are represented at the present day by
the inhabitants of Yemen, Hadramut and Oman, in general a settled
agricultural population; the latter by those of Hejaz, Nejd, El Hasa,
the Syrian desert and Mesopotamia, consisting of the Bedouin or pastoral
tribes (see ARABS and BEDOUINS). This distinction between the
characteristics of the two races is only true in a general sense, for a
considerable population of true Bedouin origin has settled down to
agricultural life in the oases of Hejaz and Nejd, while in southern
Arabia the tribes dwelling on the fringe of the great desert have to a
certain extent adopted the nomad life.

Both among the nomad and settled Arabs the organization is essentially
tribal. The affairs of the tribe are administered by the sheiks, or
heads of clans and families; the position of sheik in itself gives no
real governing power, his word and counsel carry weight, but his
influence depends on his own personal qualities. All matters affecting
the community are discussed in the _majlis_ or assembly, to which any
tribesman has access; here, too, are brought the tribesmen's causes;
both sides plead and judgment is given impartially, the loser is fined
so many head of small cattle or camels, which he must pay or go into
exile. Murder can be expiated by the payment of _diya_ or blood-money,
if the kinsmen of the murdered man consent; they may, however, claim the
life of the murderer, and long and troublesome blood feuds often ensue,
involving the relatives of both sides for generations.

Apart from the tribesmen there is in Hejaz and south Arabia a
privileged, religious class, the Sharifs or Seyyids, who claim descent
from Mahomet through his daughter Fatima. Until the Egyptian invasion in
1814 the Sharifs of Mecca were the recognized rulers of Hejaz, and
though the Turks have attempted to suppress their importance, the Sharif
still executes justice according to the Mahommedan law in the holy
cities, though, nominally, as a Turkish official. In Yemen and Hadramut
many villages are occupied exclusively by this religious hierarchy, who
are known as Ashraf, Sada or Kudha (i.e. Sharifs, Seyyids or Kadhis);
the religious affairs of the tribes are left in their hands; they do
not, however, interfere in tribal matters generally, or join in
fighting.

Below these two classes, which may be looked on as the priestly and the
military castes, there is, especially in the settled districts, a large
population of artisans and labourers, besides negro slaves and their
descendants, slave or free. The population of Khaibar consists almost
entirely of the latter, and in Hail Huber estimates the pure Arab
inhabitants at only one-third of the whole. In the desert, too, there is
a widely scattered tribe, the Salubi, which from its name (_Salib_,
cross) is conjectured to be of early Christian origin; they are great
hunters, killing ostriches and gazelles; the Arabs despise them as an
inferior race, but do not harm them; they pay a small tax to the tribe
under whose protection they live, and render service as labourers, for
which they receive in the spring milk and cheese; at the date harvest
they get wages in kind; with this, and the produce of the chase, they
manage to exist in the desert without agriculture or flocks.

  The Jews in Arabia.

In southern Arabia the Jews form a large element in the town population.
According to one authority their presence in Yemen dates from the time
of Solomon, others say from the capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadrezzar.
Manzoni estimated their number in Sana in 1878 at 1700 out of a total
population of 20,000; at Aden they are a numerous and wealthy community,
with agents in most of the towns of Yemen. Even in remote Nejran,
Halévy, himself a Jew, found a considerable colony of his
co-religionists. They wear a distinctive garb and are not allowed to
carry arms or live in the same quarter as Moslems. Another foreign
element of considerable strength in the coast towns of Muscat, Aden and
Jidda, is the British Indian trading class; many families of Indian
origin also have settled at Mecca, having originally come as pilgrims.

Estimates of the population of Arabia vary enormously, and the figures
given in the following table can only be regarded as a very rough
approximation:--

  Hejaz                       300,000
  Yemen and Asir            1,800,000
  Nejd                      1,000,000
  Hadramut                    150,000
  Oman                      1,000,000
  El Hasa                     300,000
  Syrian desert and border    275,000
                            ---------
                            4,825,000

_Communications._--The principal land routes in Arabia are those leading
to the holy cities. In the present day the Syrian pilgrim route, or Darb
el Haj, from Damascus to Medina and Mecca is the most used. The annual
pilgrim caravan or haj, numbering some 6000 people with 10,000 pack
animals, is escorted by a few Turkish irregulars known as _agel_; small
fortified posts have been established at the regular halting-places some
30 m. apart, each furnished with a well and reservoir, and for the
further protection of the haj, payments are made to the Bedouin tribes
through whose territories the route passes. The road is a mere camel
track across the desert, the chief places passed are Ma'an on the Syrian
border, a station on the old Sabaean trade route to Petra, and Medain
Salih, the site of the rock-cut tombs and inscriptions first brought to
notice by Doughty. From Medina the route usually followed descends the
W. Safra to Badr Hunen, whence it keeps near the coast passing Rabigh
and Khulesa to Mecca. The total distance, 1300 m., is covered in forty
days.

The Egyptian pilgrim route from Cairo, across the Sinai peninsula and
down the Midian coast to El Wijh, joins the Syrian route at Badr Hunen.
It also was formerly provided with stations and reservoirs, but owing to
the greater facilities of the sea journey from Suez to Jidda it is now
little used. Another important route is that taken by the Persian or
Shia pilgrims from Bagdad and Kerbela across the desert, by the wells of
Lina, to Bureda in Kasim; thence across the steppes of western Nejd till
it crosses the Hejaz border at the Ria Mecca, 50 m. north-east of the
city. It lies almost entirely in the territory of the amir Ibn Rashid of
J. Shammar, who derives a considerable revenue from the pilgrimage. The
old reservoirs on this route attributed to Zubeda, wife of Harun al
Rashid, were destroyed during the Wahhabi raids early in the 19th
century, and have not been repaired. The Yemen pilgrim route, known as
the Haj el Kabsi, led from Sada through Asir to Taif and Mecca, but it
is no longer used.

The principal trade routes are those leading from Damascus to Jauf and
across the Nafud to Hail. Other important routes leading to Nejd are
those from Kuwet to Hail, and from El Hasa to Riad respectively. In the
west and south the principal routes, other than those already mentioned,
are from Yambu to Medina, from Jidda to Mecca, Hodeda to Sana, Aden to
Sana, and from Mukalla to the Hadramut valley. Railway construction has
begun in Arabia, and in 1908 the Hejaz line, intended to connect
Damascus with Mecca, had reached Medina, 500 m. south of Ma'an. This
line is of great strategical importance, as strengthening the Turkish
hold on the Red Sea provinces. But the principal means of commercial
communication for a country like Arabia must always be by sea. Bahrein,
Kuwet and Muscat are in steam communication with India, and the Persian
Gulf ports; all the great lines of steamships call at Aden on their way
between Suez and the East, and regular services are maintained between
Suez, Jidda, Hodeda and Aden, as well as to the ports on the African
coast, while native coasting craft trade to the smaller ports on the Red
Sea and Indian Ocean.

  _Commerce._--The total value of the trade of Aden for 1904 amounted to
  over £6,000,000. The imports to Jidda in the same year were
  £1,405,000, largely consisting of rice, wheat and other food stuffs
  from India; the exports, which have dwindled away in late years,
  amounted in 1904 to only £25,000. To balance the exports and imports
  specie was exported in the three years 1902-1904 amounting to
  £2,319,000; a large proportion of this was perhaps provided by cash
  brought into the country by pilgrims.

  The pilgrim traffic increased largely in 1904 as compared with
  previous years; 74,600 persons landed at Jidda, 18,000 of whom were
  from British India, 13,000 from Java and the Straits Settlements, and
  the remainder from Turkish territory, Egypt and other countries: 235
  out of a total of 334 steamships engaged in this traffic were British.

  The trade of Hodeda, which contributes by far the largest share to
  that of Turkish Yemen, fell off considerably during the period from
  1901-1905, chiefly owing to the disturbed state of the country. In the
  latter year the imports amounted to £467,000, and the exports to
  £451,000; coffee, the mainstay of Yemen trade, shows a serious decline
  from £302,000 in 1902 to £229,000 in 1904; this is attributable partly
  to the great increase of production in other countries, but mainly to
  the insecurity of the trade routes and the exorbitant transit dues
  levied by the Turkish administration.

  Oman, through its chief port Muscat, had a total trade of about
  £550,000, two-thirds of which is due to imports and one-third to
  exports. The chief items of imports are arms and ammunition, rice,
  coffee and piece goods; the staple export is dates, which in a good
  year accounts for nearly half the total; much of the trade is in the
  hands of British Indians, and of the shipping 92% is British.

  The principal trade centre of the Arabian side of the Persian Gulf is
  Bahrein; the total volume of trade of which amounted in 1904 to
  £1,900,000, nearly equally divided between imports and exports; rice,
  piece goods, &c., form the bulk of the former, while pearls are the
  most valuable part of the latter.     (R. A. W.)

ANTIQUITIES

Arabia cannot be said to be "destitute of antiquities," but the material
for the study of these is still very incomplete. The difficulties in
the way of travelling in Arabia with a view to scientific investigation
are such that little or nothing is being done, and the systematic work
which has given such good results in Egypt, Palestine and
Babylonia-Assyria is unknown in Arabia. Yet the passing notes of
travellers from the time of Carsten Niebuhr show that antiquities are to
be found.

_Prehistoric Remains._--Since prehistoric remains must be studied where
they are found, the difficulty in the way of exploration makes itself
severely felt. That such remains exist seems clear from the casual
remarks of travellers. Thus Palgrave (_Central and Eastern Arabia_, vol.
i. ch. 6) speaks of part of a circle of roughly shaped stones taken from
the adjacent limestone mountains in the Nejd. Eight or nine of these
stones still exist, some of them 15 ft. high. Two of them, 10 to 12 ft.
apart, still bear their horizontal lintel. They are all without
ornament. Palgrave compares them with the remains at Stonehenge and
Karnak. Doughty (_Arabia Deserta_, vol. ii.), travelling in north-west
Arabia, saw stones of granite in a row and "flagstones set edgewise"
(though he does not regard these as religious), also "round heaps,
perhaps barrows," and "dry-built round chambers," which may be ancient
tombs. J.T. Bent (_Southern Arabia_, pp. 24 ff.) explored one of several
mounds in Bahrein. It proved to be a tomb, and the remains in it are
said to be Phoenician.

_Castles and Walls._--In the south of Arabia, where an advanced
civilization existed for centuries before the Christian era, the ruins
of castles and city-walls are still in existence, and have been
mentioned, though not examined carefully, by several travellers. In
Yemen and Hadramut especially these ruins abound, and in some cases
inscriptions seem to be still _in situ_. Great castles are often
mentioned in early Arabian literature. One in the neighbourhood of San'a
was described as one of the wonders of the world by Qazwini (_Athar
ul-Bilad_, p. 33, ed. Wüstenfeld, Göttingen, 1847, cf. _Journal of the
German Oriental Society_, vol. 7, pp. 472, 476, and for other castles
vol. 10, pp. 20 ff.). The ruins of the city of Ma'rib, the old Sabaean
capital, have been visited by Arnaud, Halévy and Glaser, but call for
further description, as Arnaud confined himself to a description of the
dike (see below), while Halévy and Glaser were interested chiefly in the
inscriptions.

_Wells and Dikes._--From the earliest times the conservation of water
has been one of the serious cares of the Arabs. All over the country
wells are to be found, and the masonry of some of them is undoubtedly
ancient. Inscriptions are still found in some of these in the south. The
famous well Zemzem at Mecca is said to belong to the early times, when
the eastern traffic passed from the south to the north-west of Arabia
through the Hejaz, and to have been rediscovered shortly before the time
of Mahomet. Among the most famous remains of Ma'rib are those of a great
dike reminding one of the restored tanks familiar to visitors at Aden.
These remains were first described by Arnaud (_Journal asiatique_,
January 1874, with plan). Their importance was afterwards emphasized by
Glaser's publication of two long inscriptions concerning their
restoration in the 5th and 6th centuries A.D. ("Zwei Inschriften über
den Dammbruch von Marib," in the _Mitteilungen der Vorderasiatischen
Gesellschaft_, Berlin, 1897). Another dike about 150 yds. long was seen
by W.B. Harris at Hîrran in Yemen. Above it was a series of three tanks
(_A Journey through the Yemen_, p. 279, London, 1893).

_Stones and Bronzes._--The 19th century has brought to the museums of
Europe (especially to London, Paris, Berlin and Vienna) a number of
inscriptions in the languages of Minea and Saba, and a few in those of
Hadramut and Katabania (Qatta-bania). These inscriptions are generally
on limestone or marble or on tablets of bronze, and vary from a few
inches to some feet in length and height. In some cases the originals
have been brought to Europe, in other cases only squeezes of the
inscriptions. The characters employed are apparently derived from the
Phoenician (cf. Lidzbarski's _Ephemeris_, vol. i. pp. 109 ff.). The
languages employed have been the subject of much study (cf. F. Hommel's
_Süd-arabische Chrestomathie_, Munich, 1893), but the archaeological
value of these remains has not been so fully treated. Very many of them
are votive inscriptions and contain little more than the names of gods
and princes or private men. A few are historical, but being (with few
and late exceptions) undated, have given rise to much controversy among
scholars. Their range seems to be from about 800 B.C. (or 1500 B.C.
according to E. Glaser) to the 6th century A.D. Few are still _in situ_,
the majority having been taken from their original positions and built
into houses, mosques or wells of more recent date. Among these remains
are altars, and bases for statues of gods or for golden images of
animals dedicated to gods. The earlier stones are devoid of
ornamentation, but the later stones and bronzes are sometimes ornamented
with designs of leaves, flowers, ox-heads, men and women. Some bear
figures of the conventionalized sacred tree with worshippers, similar to
Babylonian designs. Besides these there are gravestones, stelae with
human heads, fragments of limestone, architectural designs as well as
bronze castings of camels, horses, mice, serpents, &c. (cf. D.H.
Müller's _Südarabische Alterthümer im Kunsthistorischen Museum_, Vienna,
1899, with plates).

_Seals, Weights and Coins._--The Vienna Museum possesses a small number
of seals and gems. The seals are inscribed with Sabaean writing and are
of bronze, copper, silver and stone. The gems of onyx, carnelian and
agate are later and bear various figures, and in some cases Arabic
inscriptions. One or two weights are also in existence. A number of
coins have been brought to the British Museum from Aden, San'a and
Ma'rib. Others were purchased by G. Schlumberger in Constantinople;
others have been brought to Europe by Glaser, and are now in the Vienna
Museum. These are imitations of Greek models, while the inscriptions are
in Sabaean characters (cf. B.V. Head, in the _Numismatic Chronicle_,
1878, pp. 273-284; G. Schlumberger, _Le Trêsor de San'a_, Paris, 1880;
D.H. Müller, _op. cit._ pp. 65 ff. and plates).

  For the problem of Arabic antiquities in Rhodesia see RHODESIA and
  ZIMBABWE.     (G. W. T.)

HISTORY

_Introduction._--Arabia is a land of Semites, and is supposed by some
scholars to have been the original home of the Semitic peoples. Although
this cannot be said to be proved, the studies, linguistic and
archaeological, of Semitic scholars have shown it to be probable. The
dispersion from Arabia is easy to imagine. The migration into Babylonia
was simple, as there are no natural boundaries to separate it from
north-east Arabia, and similar migrations have taken place in historic
times. That of the Aramaeans at an early period is likewise free from
any natural hindrance. The connexion with Palestine has always been
close; and the Abyssinian settlement is probably as late as the
beginning of the Christian era. Of these migrations, however, history
knows nothing, nor are they expressed in literature. Arabian literature
has its own version of prehistoric times, but it is entirely legendary
and apocryphal. It was, and still is, the custom of Arabian historians
to begin with the creation of the world and tell the history from then
to the time of which they are writing. Consequently even the more sober
histories contain a mass of fables about early days. Many of these,
taken in part from Jewish and Christian sources, find a place in the
Koran. Of all these stories current at the time of Mahomet, the only
ones of any value are the accounts of the "days of the Arabs," i.e.
accounts of some famous inter-tribal battles in Arabia.

_Authorities._--Until recently the Arab traditions were practically the
only source for the pre-Islamic history of Arabia. The Old Testament
references to Arabs were obscure. The classical accounts of the invasion
of Aelius Callus in 26 B.C. threw little light on the state of Arabia at
the time, still less on its past history. The Greek writers from
Theophrastus in the 4th century B.C. to Ptolemy in the 2nd century A.D.
mention many names of Arabian peoples and describe the situation of
their cities, but contribute little to their history, and that little
could not be controlled. The same applies to the information of Pliny in
his _Natural History_. In the 19th century the discovery and
decipherment of the Assyrian inscriptions gave a slight glance into the
relations between Arabs and Assyrians from the 8th century B.C. But the
great contribution of the century to the early history of Arabia was the
collecting and translating of numerous early Arabian inscriptions (cf.
section _Antiquities_ above), which have done service both by their own
indication of a great civilization in Arabia for nearly (or more than) a
thousand years before the Christian era, and by the new stimulus which
they gave to the study and appreciation of the materials in the Assyrian
inscriptions, the Old Testament, and the Greek and Roman writers. At the
same time the facts that the inscriptions are undated until a late
period, that few are historical in their contents, and for the most part
yield only names of gods and rulers and domestic and religious details,
and that our collection is still very incomplete, have led to much
serious disagreement among scholars as to the reconstruction of the
history of Arabia in the pre-Christian centuries.

All scholars, however, are agreed that the inscriptions reach as far
back as the 9th century B.C. (some say to the 16th) and prove the
existence of at least four civilized kingdoms during these centuries.
These are the kingdoms of Ma'in (Minaean), of Saba (Sabaean), of
Hadramaut (Hadramut) and of Katabania (Katabanu). Of the two latter
little is known. That of Hadramut had kings from the time of the
Minaeans to about A.D. 300, when it was conquered by Ethiopia. The
limits of the kingdom of Katabania are not known, but it has its own
inscriptions.

As to the Sabaean kingdom there is fair agreement among scholars. The
inscriptions go back to 800 B.C. or earlier, and the same applies to the
kingdom. A queen of this people (the "Queen of Sheba") is said (1 Kings
x.) to have visited Solomon about 950 B.C. There is, however, no mention
of such a queen in the inscriptions. An Assyrian inscription mentions
Ith'amara the Sabaean who paid tribute to Sargon in 715 B.C. At this
time the Sabaeans must have been in north Arabia unless the inscription
refers to a northern colony of the southern Sabaeans. The former opinion
is held by E. Glaser, who thinks that in the 9th and 8th centuries they
moved down along the west coast to the south, where they conquered the
Minaeans (see below). The Sabaean rule is generally divided into periods
indicated by the titles given to their rulers. In the first of these
ruled the Makarib, who seem to have been priest-kings. Their first
capital was at Sirwah. Ten such rulers are mentioned in the
inscriptions. Their rule extended from the 9th to the 6th century. The
second period begins about 550 B.C. The rulers are known as "kings of
Saba." Their capital was Ma'rib. The names of seventeen of these kings
are known from the inscriptions. Their sway lasted until about 115 B.C.,
when they were succeeded by the Himyarites. During this period they were
engaged in constant strife with the neighbouring kingdoms of Hadramut
and Katabania. The great prosperity of south-west Arabia at this time
was due in large measure to the fact that the trade from India with
Egypt came there by sea and then went by land up the west coast. This
trade, however, was lost during this period, as the Ptolemies
established an overland route from India to Alexandria. The connexion of
Saba with the north, where the Nabataeans (q.v.) had existed from about
200 B.C., was now broken. The decay that followed caused a number of
Sabaeans to migrate to other parts of Arabia.

The Minaean kingdom extended over the south Arabian Jauf, its chief
cities being Karnau, Ma'in and Yathil. Some twenty-five kings are known
from the inscriptions; of these twenty are known to be related to one
another. Their history must thus cover several centuries. As
inscriptions in the Minaean language are found in al-'Ula in north
Arabia, it is probable that they had colonies in that district. With
regard to their date opinion is very much divided; some, with E. Glaser
and F. Hommel, maintaining that their kingdom existed prior to that of
Saba, probably from about 1500 B.C. or earlier until the Sabaeans came
from their home in the north and conquered them in the 9th century.
Other scholars think, with D.H. Müller, partly on palaeographical
grounds (cf. M. Lidzbarski's _Ephemeris_, vol. i. pp. 109 seq., Giessen,
1902), that none of the inscriptions are earlier than about 800 B.C. and
that the Minaean kingdom existed side by side with the Sabaean. It is
curious that the Sabaean inscriptions contain no mention of the
Minaeans, though this may be due to the fact that very few of the
inscriptions are historical in content.

About 115 B.C. the power over south Arabia passed from the Sabaeans to
the Himyarites, a people from the extreme south-west of Arabia; and
about this time the kingdom of Katabania came to an end. The title taken
by the new rulers was "king of Saba and Raidan." Twenty-six kings of
this period are known from the inscriptions, some of which are dated. In
this period the Romans made their one attempt at direct interference in
the affairs of Arabia. The invasion under Aelius Gallus was an absolute
failure, the expedition being betrayed by the guides and lost in the
sands of the desert. During the latter part of this time the
Abyssinians, who had earlier migrated from Arabia to the opposite coast
of Africa, began to flow back to the south of Arabia, where they seem to
have settled gradually and increased in importance until about A.D. 300,
when they became strong enough to overturn the Himyarite kings and
establish a dynasty of their own. The title assumed by them was "king of
Saba, Raidan, Hadramut and Yemen." The Himyarites were, however, still
active, and after a struggle succeeded in establishing a Jewish Sabaean
kingdom, having previously accepted Judaism as their religion. Their
best-known king was Dhu Nuwas. The struggle between them and the
Abyssinians now became one of Judaism against Christianity. The
persecution of the Christians was very severe (see E. Glaser's _Die
Abyssinier in Arabien und Afrika_, Munich, 1895, and F.M.E. Pereira's
_Historia dos Martyres de Nagran_, Lisbon, 1899). Apparently for this
reason Christian Abyssinia was supported from Byzantium in its attempts
to regain power. These attempts were crowned with success in 525. Of the
Christian Abyssinian kings in Arabia tradition tells of four, one only
of whom is mentioned in inscriptions. The famous expedition of Abraha,
the Abyssinian viceroy, against Mecca, took place in 570. Five years
later the Persians, who had been called in by the opponents of
Christianity, succeeded in taking over the rule and in appointing
governors over Yemen. (See further ETHIOPIA: _The Axumite Kingdom_.)

_Hira, Ghassan and Kinda._--Before passing to the time of Mahomet it is
necessary to take account of three other Arabian powers, those of Hira,
Ghassan and Kinda.

  Hira.

The kingdom of Hira (Hira) was established in the boundary land between
the Euphrates and the Arabian desert, a district renowned for its good
air and extraordinary fertility. The chief town was Hira, a few miles
south of the site of the later town of Kufa. The inhabitants of this
land are said in Tabari's history to have been of three classes:--(1)
The Tanukh (Tnuhs), who lived in tents and were made up of Arabs from
the Tehama and Nejd, who had united in Bahrein to form a new tribe, and
who migrated from there to Hira, probably at the beginning or middle of
the 3rd century A.D., when the Arsacid power was growing weak. The
Arabian historians relate their conflict with Zenobia. (2) The 'Ibad or
'Ibadites, who dwelt in the town of Hira in houses and so led a settled
life. These were Christians, whose ecclesiastical language was Syriac,
though the language of intercourse was Arabic. A Christian bishop of
Hira is known to have attended a synod in 410. In the 5th century they
became Nestorians. (3) Refugees of various tribes, who came into the
land but did not belong to the Tanukh or the 'Ibad. There is no
trustworthy information as to the earlier chiefs of this people. The
dynasty of the Lakhmids, famed in Arabian history and literature, arose
towards the end of the 3rd century and lasted until about 602. The names
of twenty kings are given by Hisham al-Kalbi in Tabari's history.
Although so many of their subjects were Christian, the Lakhmids remained
heathen until Nu'man, the last of the dynasty. The kingdom of Hira was
never really independent, but always stood in a relation of dependence
on Persia, probably receiving pay from it and employing Persian
soldiers. At the height of its power it was able to render valuable aid
to its suzerain. Much of its time was spent in wars with Rome and
Ghassan. Its revenues were derived from the Bedouins of the surrounding
lands as well as from its own subjects at home. About 602 the Lakhmid
dynasty fell, and the Persian Chosroes (Khosrau) II. appointed as
governor an Arab of the tribe of Tai. Shortly after it came into
relation with Islam.

  See G. Rothstein's _Die Dynastie der Lakhmiden in al-Hira_ (Berlin,
  1899); Th. Nöldeke's _Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der
  Sassaniden_ (Leiden, 1879).

[Illustration: ARABIA]

  Ghassan.

In the beginning of the 6th century A.D. a dynasty known as the Jafnids,
enter into the history alike of the Roman and Persian empires. They
ruled over the tribe of Ghassan in the extreme north-west of Arabia,
east of the Jordan, from near Petra in the south to the neighbourhood of
Rosafa in the north-east. Of their origin little is known except that
they came from the south. A part of the same tribe inhabited Yathrib
(Medina) at the time of Mahomet. The first certain prince of the Jafnid
house was Harith ibn Jabala, who, according to the chronicle of John
Malalas, conquered Mondhir (Mundhir) of Hira in 528. In the following
year, according to Procopius, Justinian perceived the value of the
Ghassanids as an outpost of the Roman empire, and as opponents of the
Persian dependants of Hira, and recognized Harith as king of the Arabs
and patrician of the Roman empire. He was thus constantly engaged in
battles against Hira. In 541 he fought under Belisarius in Mesopotamia.
After his death about 569 or 570 the friendly relations with the West
continued, but about 583 there was a breach. The Ghassanid kingdom split
into sections each with its own prince. Some passed under the sway of
Persia, others preserved their freedom at the expense of their
neighbours. At this point their history ceases to be mentioned in the
Western chronicles. There are references to the Ghassanid Nu'man in the
poems of Nabigha. Arabian tradition tells of their prince Jabala ibn
Aiham who accepted Islam, after fighting against it, but finding it too
democratic, returned to Christianity and exile in the Roman empire. As
Islam advanced, some of the Ghassanids retreated to Cappadocia, others
accepted the new faith.

  See Th. Noldeke, _Die ghassanischen Fürsten aus dent Hause Gafna's_
  (Berlin, 1887).

  Kinda.

In the last decade of the 5th century a new power arose in central
Arabia. This was the tribe of Kinda under the sway of the family of Aqil
ul Murar, who came from the south. They seem to have stood in much the
same relation to the rulers of Yemen, as the people of Hira to the
Persians and the Ghassanids to Rome. Abraha in his invasion of the Hejaz
was accompanied by chiefs of Kinda. Details of their history are not
known, but they seem to have gained power at one time even over the
Lakhmids of Hira; and to have ruled over Bahrein as well as Yemama until
the battle of Shi'b ul Jabala, when they lost this province to Hira. The
poet Amru'ul Qais was a member of the princely family of Kinda.

  Other parts of Arabia.

Outside the territory of the powers mentioned above, Arabia in the 6th
century was in a state of political chaos. Bahrein, inhabited chiefly by
the Bani'Abd Qais and the Bani Bakr, was largely subject to Persian
influence near its coast, and a Persian governor, Sebocht, resided in
Hajar, its chief town. In Oman the Arabs, who were chiefly engaged in
fishing and seafaring, were Azdites mixed with Persians. The ruling
dynasty of Julanda in their capital Suhar lasted on till the Abbasid
period. No Persian officials are mentioned in this country; whether
Persians exercised authority over it is doubtful. On the west coast of
Arabia the influence of the kingdom of Yemen was felt in varying degree
according to the strength of the rulers of that land. Apart from this
influence the Hejaz was simply a collection of cities each with its own
government, while outside the cities the various tribes governed
themselves and fought continual battles with one another.

_Time of Mahomet._--Thus at the time of Mahomet's advent the country was
peopled by various tribes, some more or less settled under the
governments of south Arabia, Kinda, Hira and Ghassan, these in turn
depending on Abyssinia, Persia and Rome (i.e. Byzantium); others as in
the Hejaz were ruled in smaller communities by members of leading
families, while in various parts of the peninsula were wandering Arabs
still maintaining the traditions of old family and tribal rule, forming
no state, sometimes passing, as suited them, under the influence and
protection of one or another of the greater powers. To these may be
added a certain number of Jewish tribes and families deriving their
origin partly from migrations from Palestine, partly from converts among
the Arabs themselves. Mahomet appealed at once to religion and
patriotism, or rather created a feeling for both. For Mahomet as a
religious teacher and for the details of his career see MAHOMET. It is
enough here to outline his actions in so far as he attempted to create a
united, and then a conquering, Arabia. Though the external conquests of
the Arabs belong more properly to the period of the caliphate, yet they
were the natural outcome of the prophet's ideas. His idea of Arabia for
the Arabians could only be realized by summoning the great kings of the
surrounding nations to recognize Islam; otherwise Abyssinia, Persia and
Rome (Byzantium) would continue their former endeavours to influence and
control the affairs of the peninsula. Tradition tells that a few years
before his death he did actually send letters to the emperor Heraclius,
to the negus of Abyssinia, the king of Persia, and Cyrus, patriarch of
Alexandria, the "Mukaukis" of Egypt, summoning them to accept Islam and
threatening them with punishment in case of refusal. But the task of
carrying out these threats fell to the lot of his successors; the work
of the prophet was to be the subjugating and uniting of Arabia. This
work, scarcely begun in Mecca, was really started after the migration to
Medina by the formation of a party of men--the _Muhajirun_ (Refugees or
Emigrants) and the _Ansar_ (Helpers or Defenders)--who accepted Mahomet
as their religious leader. As the necessity of overcoming his enemies
became urgent, this party became military. A few successes in battle
attracted to him men who were interested in fighting and who were
willing to accept his religion as a condition of membership of his
party, which soon began to assume a national form. Mahomet early found
an excuse for attacking the Jews, who were naturally in the way of his
schemes. The Bani Nadir were expelled, the Bani Quraiza slaughtered. By
the time he had successfully stormed the rich Jewish town of Khaibar, he
had found that it was better to allow industrious Jews to remain in
Arabia as payers of tribute than to expel or kill them: this policy he
followed afterwards. The capture of Mecca (630) was not only an evidence
of his growing power, which induced Arabs throughout the peninsula to
join him, but gave him a valuable centre of pilgrimage, in which he was
able by a politic adoption of some of the heathen Arabian ceremonies
into his own rites to win men over the more easily to his own cause. At
his death in 623 Mahomet left Arabia practically unified. It is true
that rival prophets were leading rebellions in various parts of Arabia,
that the tax-collectors were not always paid, and that the warriors of
the land were much distressed for want of work owing to the brotherhood
of Arabs proclaimed by Mahomet. The tribes were a seething mass of
restlessness, their old feuds ready to break out again. But they had
realized that they had common interests. The power of the foreigner in
Arabia was broken. Islam promised rich booty for those who fought and
won, paradise for those who fell.

_Early Caliphs_.[1] 1. _Conquest._--One task of the early caliphs was to
find an outlet for the restless fighting spirit. Abu Bekr (632-634), the
first of these caliphs, was a man of simple life and profound faith. He
understood the intention of Mahomet as to foreign nations, and set
himself resolutely to carry it out in the face of much difficulty. Hence
as soon as he assumed office he sent out the army already chosen to
advance against the Romans in the north. The successful reduction of the
rebels in Arabia enabled him in his first year to send his great general
Khalid with his Arab warriors first against Persians, then against
Romans. His early death prevented him from seeing the fruits of his
policy. Under the second caliph Omar (634-644) the Persians were
defeated at Kadesiya (Kadessia), and Irak was completely subdued and the
new cities of Kufa and Basra were founded (635). In the same year
Damascus fell into the hands of the Arabs under Abu 'Ubaida. In 636
Jerusalem fell and received a visit from the caliph. Three years later
the fateful step was taken of appointing Moawiya (Mu'awiyya) governor of
Syria. In 640 'Amr-ibn-el-Ass (Amr ibn al-'As) invaded Egypt and the
following year took Alexandria and founded Fostat (which later became
Cairo). The victory at Nehavend in 641 over the Persians, the flight of
the last Sassanid king and the capture of Rei or Rai (class. Rhagae) in
643 meant the entire subjugation of Persia and crowned the conquests of
Omar's caliphate. The reign of the third caliph Othman (644-656) was
marked by the beginning of that internal strife which was to ruin
Arabia; but the foreign conquests continued. In the north the Moslem
arms reached Armenia and Asia Minor; on the west they were successful as
far as Carthage on the north coast of Africa. After the murder of
Othman, 'Ali (656-661) became caliph, but Moawiya, governor of Syria,
soon rebelled on the pretext of avenging the death of Othman. After the
battle of Siffin (657) arbitration was resorted to for the settlement of
the rival claims. By a trick 'Ali was deposed (658), and the Omayyad
dynasty was established with its capital at Damascus.

  Institution of navy.

During these early years the Arabs had not only made conquests by land,
but had found an outlet for their energy at sea. In 640 Omar sent a
fleet of boats across the Red Sea to protect the Moslems on the
Abyssinian coast. The boats were wrecked. Omar was so terrified by this
that when Moawiya applied to him for permission to use ships for an
attack on the islands of the Levant, he resolutely refused. Othman was
less careful, and allowed a fleet from Africa to help in the conquests
of the Levant and Asia Minor. In 649 he sanctioned the establishment of
a maritime service, on condition that it should be voluntary. Abu Qais,
appointed admiral, showed its usefulness by the capture of Cyprus. In
652 Abu Sarh with a fleet from Egypt won a naval battle over the
Byzantine fleet near Alexandria.

2. _Internal Affairs._--In the meantime what had become of Arabia and
its unification? The first task of Abu Bekr had been to reduce those
rebels who threatened to destroy that unity even before it was fully
established. This he did by the aid of the great general Khalid. First
he swept down on the Bani Hanifa in Yemama, who with their rival prophet
Mosailama (Mosailima) and 40,000 men were in arms. The battle of Yemama
(633) was fierce and decisive. Mosailama was slain. The Bani Hanifa
returned to Islam. Bahrein was influenced by this battle, and the
rebellion there, which was threatening, was crushed. Oman was
reconquered by Huddhaifa, who became its governor. Ikrima settled Mahra.
Muhajir, with the help of Ikrima, succeeded with difficulty, but
thoroughly, in defeating Amr ibn Ma'dikarib and Qais ibn 'Abd Yaghuth in
Yemen and Ashath ibn Qais in Hadramut. The Hejaz and Tehama were cleared
of the plundering nomads by 'Attab and Tahir. At the end of the first
year of his caliphate Abu Bekr saw Arabia united under Islam. The new
national feeling demanded that all Arabs should be free men, so the
caliph ordained that all Arab slaves should be freed on easy terms. The
solidarity of Arabia survived the first foreign conquests. It was not
intended that Arabs should settle in the conquered lands except as
armies of occupation. Thus it was at first forbidden that Arabs should
buy or possess land in these countries. Kufa was to be only a military
camp, as was Fostat in Egypt. The taxes with the booty from conquests
were to be sent to Arabia for distribution among the Moslems. Omar tried
to prevent the advance of conquests lest Arabia should suffer. "I would
rather the safety of my people than thousands of spoil and further
conquest." But men could not be prevented from pouring out from their
homes in search of new conquests and more booty. Many of those who went
forth did not return. They acquired property and rank in the new lands.
Kufa attracted chiefly men of south Arabia, Basra those of the north.
Both became great cities, each with a population of 150,000 to 200,000
Arabians. Yet so long as the caliphs lived in Medina, the capital of
Arabia was the capital of the expanding Arabian empire. To it was
brought a large share of the booty. The caliphs were chosen there, and
there the rules for the administration were framed. Thence went out the
governors to their provinces. Omar was the great organizer of Arabian
affairs. He compiled the Koran, instituted the civil list, regulated the
military organization. He, too, desired that Mahomet's wish should be
carried out and that Arabia should be purely Moslem. To this end he
expelled the Christians from Nejran and gave them lands in Syria and
Irak, where they were allowed to live in peace on payment of tribute.
The Jews, too, were shortly after expelled from Khaibar. The secondary
position that Arabia was beginning to assume in the Arabian empire is
clearly marked in the progress of events during the caliphate of Othman.
In his appointments to governorships and other offices, as well as in
his distribution of spoil, Othman showed a marked preference for the
members of his own tribe the Koreish (Quraish) and the members of his
own family the Bani Omayya (Umayya). The other Arab tribes became
increasingly jealous of the Koreish, while among the Koreish themselves
the Hashimite family came to hate the Omayyad, which now had much power,
although it had been among the last to accept Islam and never was very
strict in its religious duties. But the quarrels which led to the murder
of Othman were fomented not so much in Arabia as in Kufa and Basra and
Fostat. In these cities the rival parties were composed of the most
energetic fighting men, who were brought into the most intimate contact
with one another, and who kept up their quarrels from the home land. In
Kufa a number of the Koreish had settled, and their arrogance became
insupportable. The governors of all these towns were of Othman's own
family. After some years of growing dissatisfaction deputies from these
places came to Medina, and the result was the murder of the caliph.
Syria alone remained loyal to the house of Omayya, and Othman had been
advised to take refuge there, but had refused. Arabia itself counted for
little in the strife. Yet its prestige was not altogether lost. After
the murder the rebels were unwilling to return home until a new caliph
had been chosen in the capital. The Egyptian rebels managed to gain most
influence, and, in accordance with their desire, 'Ali was appointed
caliph by the citizens of Medina. But Medina itself was being corrupted
by the constant influx of captives, who, employed at first as servants,
soon became powerful enough to dictate to their masters. In the struggle
that ensued upon the election of 'Ali, Arabia was involved. Ayesha,
Talha and Zobair, who were strong in Mecca, succeeded in obtaining
possession of Basra, but were defeated in 656 at the battle of the Camel
(see ALI). In the south of Arabia 'Ali succeeded in establishing his own
governor in Yemen, though the government treasure was carried off to
Mecca. But the centre of strife was not to be Arabia. When 'Ali left
Medina to secure Basra, he abandoned it as the capital of the Arabian
empire. With the success of Moawiya Damascus became the capital of the
caliphate (658) and Arabia became a mere province, though always of
importance because of its possession of the two sacred cities Mecca and
Medina. Both these cities were secured by Moawiya in 660, and at the
same time Yemen was punished for its adherence to 'Ali. The final blow
to any political pretensions of Medina was dealt by the caliph when he
had his son Yazid declared as his successor, thus taking away any claim
on the part of the citizens of Medina to elect to the caliphate.

_The Omayyads._--The early years of the Omayyads were years of constant
strife in Arabia. The Kharijites who had opposed 'Ali on the ground that
he had no right to allow the appeal to arbitration, were defeated at
Nahrawan or Nahrwan (658), but those who escaped became fierce
propagandists against the Koreish, some claiming that the caliph should
be chosen by the Faithful from any tribe of the Arabs, some that there
should be no caliph at all, that God alone was their ruler and that the
government should be carried on by a council. They broke up into many
sects, and were long a disturbing political force in Arabia as
elsewhere. On the death of 'Ali his house was represented by his two
sons Hasan and Hosain (Husain). Hasan soon made peace with Moawiya. On
the accession of Yazid, Hosain refused homage and raised an army, but
was slain at Kerbela (680). 'Abdallah ibn Zobair (of the house of
Hashim) immediately stepped forward in Mecca as the avenger of 'Ali's
family and the champion of religion. The two sacred cities supported
him. Medina was besieged and sacked by the troops of Yazid (682) and
Mecca was besieged the following year. The siege was raised in the third
month on the news of the death of Yazid, but not before the Ka'ba had
been destroyed. 'Abdallah remained in Mecca recognized as caliph in
Arabia, and soon after in Egypt and even a part of Syria. He defeated
the troops of Merwan I., but could not win the support of the
Kharijites. In 691 Abdalmalik ('Abdul-Malik) determined to crush his
rival and sent his general Hajjaj against Mecca. The siege was begun in
March 692, and in October the city was taken and 'Abdallah slain.
Abdalmalik was now supreme in Arabia and throughout the Moslem world.
During the remaining years of the Omayyad dynasty (i.e. until 750)
little is heard of Arabia in history. The conquests of Islam in Spain on
the one side and India on the other had little or no effect on it. It
was merely a province.

_The 'Abbasids._--The accession of Abul 'Abbas (of the house of Hashim)
and the transference of the capital of the caliphate from Damascus to
Kufa, then Anbar and soon after (in 760) to Bagdad meant still further
degradation to Arabia and Arabs. From the beginning the 'Abbasids
depended for help on Persians and Turks, and the chief offices of state
were frequently filled with foreigners. In one thing only the Arabs
conquered to the end; that was in their language. The study of Arabic
was taken up by lexicographers, grammarians and poets (mostly of foreign
origin) with a zeal rarely shown elsewhere. The old Arabian war spirit
was dying. Although the Arabians, as a rule, were in favour of the
Omayyad family, they could not affect the succession of the 'Abbasids.
They returned more and more to their old inter-tribal disputes. They
formed now not only a mere branch of the empire of the caliphate, but a
branch deriving little life from and giving less to the main stock. In
762 there was a rebellion in favour of a descendant of 'Ali, but it was
put down with great severity by the army of the caliph Mansur. A more
local 'Alyite revolt in Mecca and Medina was crushed in 785. In the
contest between the two sons of Harun al Rashid all Arabia sided with
Mamun (812). In 845-846 the lawless raids of Bedouin tribes compelled
the caliph Wathiq to send his Turkish general Bogha, who was more
successful in the north than in the centre and south of Arabia in
restoring peace.

_The Carmathians._--Towards the close of the 9th century Arabia was
disturbed by the rise of a new movement which during the next hundred
years dominated the peninsula, and at its close left it shattered never
to be united again. In the year 880 Yemen was listening to the
propaganda of the new sect of the Carmathians (q.v.) or followers of
Hamdan Qarmat. Four years later these had become a public force. In 900
'Abu Sa'id al-Jannabi, who had been sent to Bahrein by Hamdan, had
secured a large part of this province and had won the city of Katif
(Ketif) which contained many Jews and Persians. The Arabs who lived more
inland were mostly Bedouin who found the obligations of Islam irksome,
and do not seem to have made a very vigorous opposition to the
Carmathians who took Hajar the capital of Bahrein in 903. From this they
made successful attacks on Yemama (Yamama), and attempts only partially
successful at first at Oman. In 906 the court at Bagdad learned that
these sectaries had gained almost all Yemen and were threatening Mecca
and Medina. Abu Sa'id was assassinated (913) in his palace at Lahsa
(which in 926 was fortified and became the Carmathian capital of
Bahrein). His son Sa'id succeeded him, but proved too weak and was
deposed and succeeded by his brother Abu Tahir. His success was constant
and the caliphate was brought very low by him. In Arabia he subjugated
Oman, and swooping down on the west in 929 he horrified the Moslem world
by capturing Mecca and carrying off the sacred black stone to Bahrein.
The Fatimite caliph 'Obaidallah (see FATIMITES), to whom Abu Tahir
professed allegiance, publicly wrote to him to restore the stone, but
there is some reason to believe that he secretly encouraged him to
retain it. In 939, however, the stone was restored and pilgrimages to
the holy cities were allowed to pass unmolested on payment of a tax. So
long as Abu Tahir lived the Carmathians controlled Arabia. After his
death, however, they quarrelled with the Fatimite rulers of Egypt (969)
and began to lose their influence. In 985 they were completely defeated
in Irak, and soon after lost control of the pilgrimages. Oman recovered
its independence. Three years later Katif, at that time their chief
city, was besieged and taken by a Bedouin sheik, and subsequently their
political power in Arabia came to an end. It was significant that their
power fell into the hands of Bedouins. Arabia was now completely
disorganized, and was only nominally subject to the caliphate. The
attempt of Mahomet to unify Arabia had failed. The country was once more
split up into small governments, more or less independent, and groups of
wandering tribes carrying on their petty feuds. Of the history of these
during the next few centuries little is known, except in the case of the
Hejaz. Here the presence of the sacred cities led writers to record
their annals (cf. F. Wüstenfeld's _Die Chroniken der Stadt Mekka_, 4
vols., Leipzig, 1857-1861). The two cities were governed by Arabian
nobles (_sherifs_), often at feud with one another, recognizing formally
the overlordship of the caliph at Bagdad or the caliph of Egypt. Thus in
966 the name of the caliph Moti was banished from the prayers at Mecca,
and an 'Alyite took possession of the government of the city and
recognized the Egyptian caliph as his master. About a century later
(1075-1094) the 'Abbasid caliph was again recognized as spiritual head
owing to the success in arms of his protector, the Seljuk Malik-Shah.
With the fall of the Bagdad caliphate all attempts at control from that
quarter came to an end. After the visit of the Sultaft Bibars (1269)
Mecca was governed by an amir dependent on Egypt. Outside the two cities
anarchy prevailed, and the pilgrimage was frequently unsafe owing to
marauding Bedouins. In 1517 the Osmanli Turkish sultan Selim conquered
Egypt, and having received the right of succession to the caliphate was
solemnly presented by the sherif of Mecca with the keys of the city, and
recognized as the spiritual head of Islam and ruler of the Hejaz. At the
same time Yemen, which since the 9th century had been in the power of a
number of small dynasties ruling in Zubed, San'a, Sa'da and Aden, passed
into the hands of the Turk.

  For the history of Yemen during this period cf. H.C. Kay, _Omarah's
  History of Yaman_ (London, 1892), and S. Lane-Poole, _The Mahommedan
  Dynasties_, pp. 87-103 (Westminster, 1894). Little more than a century
  later (1630), a Yemen noble Khasim succeeded in expelling the Turk and
  establishing a native imamate, which lasted until 1871. For
  descriptions of it in the 18th century cf. C. Niebuhr's accounts of
  his travels in Arabia in 1761.

_Oman._--Since the separation from the caliphate (before 1000 A.D.) Oman
had remained independent. For more than a century it was governed by
five elected imams, who were chosen from the tribe of al-Azd and
generally lived at Nizwa. After them the Bani Nebhan gained the upper
hand and established a succession of kings (_maliks_) who governed from
1154 to 1406. During this time the country was twice invaded by
Persians. The "kings of Hormuz" claimed authority over the coast land
until the beginning of the 16th century. In 1435 the people rose against
the tyranny of the Bani Nebhan and restored the imamate of the tribe
al-Azd. In 1508 the Portuguese under Albuquerque seized most of the east
coast of Oman. In 1624 a new dynasty arose in the interior, when Nasir
ibn Murshid of the Yariba (Ya'aruba) tribe (originally from Yemen) was
elected imam and established his capital at Rustak. He was able to
subdue the petty princes of the country, and the Portuguese were
compelled to give up several towns and pay tribute for their residence
at Muscat. About 1651 the Portuguese were finally expelled from this
city, and about 1698 from the Omanite settlements on the east coast of
Africa.

  For the history of Oman from 661 to 1856 cf. G.P. Badger, _History of
  the Imams and Seyyids of Oman by Salil-ibn-Razik_ (London, Hakluyt
  Society, 1871).     (G. W. T.)

_Wahhabi Movement._--Modern Arabian history begins with that of the
Wahhabi movement in the middle of the 18th century. Its originator,
Mahommed Ibn Abdul Wahhab, was born (1691) at Ayana in Nejd, and after
studying in Basra and Damascus, and making the pilgrimage to Mecca
returned to his native country and settled down at Huremala near
Deraiya. The abuses and corruptions which had overgrown the practice of
orthodox Islam had deeply impressed him, and he set to work to combat
them, and to inculcate on all good Moslems a return to the pure
simplicity of their original faith. In 1742 Mahommed Ibn Saud, sheik of
Deraiya, accepted his doctrines, and enforced them by his sword with
such effect that before his death in 1765 the whole of eastern Nejd and
El Hasa was converted to the faith of Abdul Wahhab, and accepted the
political supremacy of Ibn Saud. His son and successor, Abdul Aziz, in a
rapid series of successful campaigns, extended his dominion and that of
the reformed faith far beyond the limits of Nejd. His attacks on the
pilgrim caravans, begun in 1783 and constantly repeated, startled the
Mahommedan world,[2] and compelled the attention of the sultan, as the
nominal protector of the faithful. In 1798 a Turkish force was sent from
Bagdad into El Hasa, but was compelled to retreat without accomplishing
anything, and its discomfiture added much to the renown of the Wahhabi
power. In 1801 Saud, son of the amir Abdul Aziz, led an expedition to
the Euphrates, and on the festival of Bairam, the 20th of April, stormed
Kerbela, put the defenders to the sword, destroyed the sacred tomb,
scattered the sacred relics and returned laden with the treasures,
accumulated during centuries in the sanctuary of the Shia faith. Mecca
itself was taken; plundering was forbidden, but the tombs of the saints
and all objects of veneration were ruthlessly destroyed, and all
ceremonies which seemed in the eye of the stern puritan conqueror to
suggest the taint of idolatry were forbidden.

On the 14th of October 1802 the amir Abdul Aziz, at the age of
eighty-two years, was murdered by a Shia fanatic when at prayers in the
mosque of Deraiya, and Saud, who had for many years led the Wahhabi
armies, became the reigning amir. In 1804 Medina was taken and with its
fall all resistance ceased. The Wahhabi empire had now attained its
zenith, a settled government was established able to enforce law and
order in the desert and in the towns, and a spirit of Arabian
nationality had grown up which bade fair to extend the Wahhabi dominion
over all the Arab race. It already, however, bore within it the germ of
decay; the accumulation of treasure in the capital had led to a
corruption of the simple manners of the earlier times; the exhaustion of
the tribes through the heavy blood tax had roused discontent among them;
the plundering of the holy places, the attacks on the pilgrim caravans
under the escort of Turkish soldiers, and finally, in 1810, the
desecration of the tomb of Mahomet and the removal of its costly
treasures, raised a cry of dismay throughout the Mahommedan world, and
made it clear even to the Turkish sultan that unless the Wahhabi power
were crushed his claims to the caliphate were at an end.

But Turkey was herself fully occupied by affairs in Europe, and to
Mehemet Ali, then pasha of Egypt, was deputed the task of bringing the
Wahhabis into subjection. In October 1811 an expedition consisting of
10,000 men under Tusun Pasha, the pasha's son, a youth of sixteen,
landed in Hejaz without opposition. Saud with his main forces had
started northwards to attack Bagdad, but returning at once he met and
defeated Tusun with great loss and compelled him to retire. Medina and
subsequently Mecca were eventually taken by the Egyptians, but in spite
of continual reinforcements they could do little more than hold their
own in Hejaz. In 1813 Mehemet Ali was compelled to take the field
himself with fresh troops, but was unable to achieve any decisive
success, and in 1814 Tusun was again defeated beyond Taif. In May 1814
Saud died, and his son, Abdallah, attempted to negotiate, but Mehemet
Ali refused all overtures, and in January 1815 advanced into Nejd,
defeated the Wahhabi army and occupied Ras, then the chief town in
Kasim. Terms of peace were made, but on the retirement of the Egyptians
Abdallah refused to carry out the conditions agreed on, which included
the return of the jewels plundered by his father, and another campaign
had to be fought before his submission was obtained. Ibrahim Pasha
replaced Tusun in command, and on reaching Arabia in September 1816 his
first aim was to gain over the great Bedouin tribes holding the roads
between Hejaz and his objective in Nejd; having thus secured his line of
advance he pushed on boldly and defeated Abdallah at Wiya, where he put
to death all prisoners taken; thence rapidly advancing, with contingents
of the friendly Harb and Muter tribes in support of his regular troops,
he laid siege to Ras; this place, however, held out and after a four
months' siege he was compelled to give up the attack. Leaving it on one
side he pushed on eastwards, took Aneza after six days' bombardment and
occupied Bureda. Here he waited two months for reinforcements, and with
his Bedouin contingent, strengthened by the adhesion of the Ateba and
Bani Khalid tribes, advanced on Shakra in Wushm, which fell in January
1818 after a regular siege. After destroying Huremala and massacring its
inhabitants, he arrived before Deraiya on the 14th of April 1818. For
six months the siege went on with varying fortune, but at last the
courage and determination of Ibrahim triumphed, and on the 9th of
September, after a heroic resistance, Abdallah, with a remnant of four
hundred men, was compelled to surrender. The Wahhabi leader was soon
after sent to Constantinople, where, in spite of Mehemet Ali's
intercession, he and the companions who had followed him in his
captivity were condemned to death, and after being paraded through the
city with ignominy for three days were finally beheaded.

Deraiya was razed to the ground and the principal towns of Nejd were
compelled to admit Egyptian garrisons; but though the Arabs saw
themselves powerless to stand before disciplined troops, the Egyptians,
on the other hand, had to confess that without useless sacrifices they
could not retain their hold on the interior.

In 1824 Turki, son of the unfortunate Abdallah, headed a rising which
resulted in the re-establishment of the Wahhabi state with Riad as its
new capital; and during the next ten years he consolidated his power,
paying tribute to and under the nominal suzerainty of Egypt till his
murder in 1834. His son, Fesal, succeeded him, but in 1836 on his
refusal to pay tribute an Egyptian force was sent to depose him and he
was taken prisoner and sent to Cairo, while a rival claimant, Khalid,
was established as amir in Riad. Mehemet Ali and his son Ibrahim Pasha
were, however, now committed to their conflict with Turkey for Syria and
Asia Minor, and had no troops to spare for the thankless task of holding
the Arabian deserts; the garrisons were gradually withdrawn, and in 1842
Fesal, who had escaped from his prison at Cairo reappeared and was
everywhere recognized as amir. The few remaining Egyptian troops were
ejected from Riad, and with them all semblance of Egyptian or Turkish
rule disappeared from central Arabia.

For a time it looked as if the supremacy of the Wahhabi empire was to be
renewed; El Hasa, Harik, Kasim and Asir returned to their allegiance,
but over Oman and Yemen Fesal never re-established his dominion, and the
Bahrein sheiks with British support kept their independence.

  Ibn Rashid.

A rival state had, however, arisen, under Abdallah Ibn Rashid in Jebel
Shammar. Driven into exile owing to a feud between his family and the
Ibn Ali, the leading family of the Shammar, Abdallah came to Riad in
1830, and was favourably received by the amir Turki. In 1834 he was with
Fesal on an expedition against El Hasa when news came of the amir's
murder by his cousin Masharah. By Abdallah's advice the expedition was
abandoned; Fesal hastened back with all his forces to Riad, and invested
the citadel where Masharah had taken refuge, but failed to gain
possession of it, until Abdallah with two companions found his way into
the palace, killed Masharah, and placed Fesal on the throne of his
father. As a reward for his services Abdallah was appointed governor of
Jebel Shammar, and had already established himself in Hail when the
Egyptian expedition of 1836 removed Fesal temporarily from Nejd. During
the exile of the latter he steadily consolidated his power, extending
his influence more especially over the desert tribes, till on Fesal's
return in 1842 he had created a state subject only in name to that of
which Riad was the capital.

On the death of Abdallah in 1843, his son Talal succeeded. He set
himself to work to establish law and order throughout the state, to
arrange its finances, and to encourage the settlement in Hail of
artificers and merchants from abroad; the building of the citadel and
palace commenced by Mehemet Ali, and continued by Abdallah Ibn Rashid,
was completed by Talal. The town walls were strengthened, new wells dug,
gardens planted, mosques and schools built. His uncle Obed, to whom
equally with Abdallah is due the foundation of the Ibn Rashid dynasty,
laboured to extend the Shammar boundaries. Khaibar, Tema and Jauf became
tributary to Hail.

Though tolerant in religion Talal was careful to avoid the suspicion of
lukewarmness towards the Wahhabi formulas. Luxury in clothing and the
use of tobacco were prohibited; attendance at the mosque was enforced:
any doubt as to his orthodoxy was silenced by the amount and regularity
of the tribute sent by him to Riad. Equally guarded was his attitude to
the Turkish authorities; it is not improbable that Talal had also
entered into relations with the viceroy of Egypt to ensure his position
in case of a collision with the Porte. During his twenty years' reign
Jebel Shammar became a model state, where justice and security ruled in
a manner before unheard of. Fesal may well have watched with jealous
anxiety the growing strength of his neighbour's state as compared with
his own, where all progress was arrested by the deadening tyranny of
religious fanaticism.

  The amir Mahommed.

On the 11th of March 1868 Talal, smitten with an incurable malady, fell
by his own hand and was succeeded by his brother Matab; after a brief
reign he was murdered by his nephews, the elder of whom, Bandar, became
amir. Mahommed, the third son of the amir Abdallah, was at the time
absent; with a view of getting his uncle into his power, Bandar invited
him to return to Hail, and on his arrival went out to meet him
accompanied by Hamud, son of Obed, and a small following. Warned by a
hurried sign by Hamud that his life was in danger, Mahommed at once
attacked Bandar, stabbed him and took possession of the citadel; a
general massacre of all members of the house of Ibn Rashid followed, and
next day Mahommed appeared with his cousin Hamud in the market-place of
Hail, and announced his assumption of the amirship. A strong and capable
ruler, he soon established his authority over all northern and western
Nejd, and in 1872 the opportunity arrived for his intervention in the
east. In that year Abdallah, who had succeeded Fesal in Riad in 1867,
was deposed, but with the assistance of Mahommed was reinstated; two
years later, however, he was again deposed and forced to seek refuge at
Hail, from which place he appealed for assistance to the Turkish
authorities at Bagdad. Midhat Pasha, then governor-general, seized the
occasion of asserting Turkish dominion on the Persian Gulf coast, and in
1875, in spite of British protests, occupied El Hasa and established a
new province under the title of Nejd, with its headquarters at Hofuf, of
which Abdallah was appointed governor. This was an event of some
importance, as it constituted the first Turkish claim to the sovereignty
over Nejd abandoned by Egypt thirty-three years earlier. The Turks did
not support their client by advancing into Nejd itself, and he and his
rivals were left to fight out their battles among themselves. Turkey was
indeed too much occupied by the war with Russia to pay much attention to
Arab affairs, though a few years later she attempted to occupy Bahrein
by a _coup de main_, which was only frustrated by the action of a
British gunboat.

Owing to the dissensions among the ruling family of Riad, the towns of
eastern Nejd gradually reverted to their former condition of
independence, but menaced in turn by the growing power of Hail, they
formed a coalition under the leadership of Zamil, sheik of Aneza, and in
the spring of 1891, Aneza, Bureda, Shakra, Ras and Riad assembled their
contingents to contest with Ibn Rashid the supremacy in Nejd. The latter
had besides 20,000 of his own south Shammar tribesmen, the whole
strength of the Harb Bedouins, some 10,000 men, and an additional
support of 1000 mounted men from his kinsmen, the northern Shammar from
the Euphrates, while the Muter and Ateba tribes took part with the
allies. The total strength of each side amounted to about 30,000 men.
Zamil's forces held a strong position between Aneza and Bureda, and for
over a month desultory fighting went on; finally an attack was made
against the defenders' centre, covered by 20,000 camel riders; the men
of Aneza broke and the whole allied forces fled in disorder; Zamil and
his eldest son were killed, as were also two of the Ibn Saud family,
while the remainder were taken prisoners. Aneza and Bureda surrendered
the same day, and shortly after Ras, Shakra and Riad tendered their
submission.

This victory placed the whole of northern and central Arabia under the
supremacy of Mahommed Ibn Rashid, which he held undisputed during the
rest of his life.

  Recent history.

On his death in 1897 his nephew Abdul-Aziz, son of the murdered amir
Matab, succeeded; during his reign a new element has been introduced
into Nejd politics by the rising importance of Kuwet (Koweit) and the
attempts of Turkey to obtain possession of its important harbour. In
1901 a quarrel arose between Sheik Mubarak of Kuwet and the amir of Hail
whose cause was supported by Turkey. A force was equipped at Basra under
Ahmad Feizi Pasha with the intention of occupying Kuwet; Mubarak
thereupon appealed to Great Britain and action was taken which prevented
the Turkish designs from being carried out. Kuwet was not formally
placed under British protection, but it was officially announced by the
government on the 5th of May 1903 "that the establishment of a naval
base or fortified port in the Persian Gulf by any other power would be
regarded as a very grave menace to British interests which would
certainly be resisted with all the means at its disposal."

In the meantime Sheik Mubarak had found useful allies in the Muntafik
Arabs from the lower Euphrates, and the Wahhabis of Riad; the latter
under the amir Ibn Saud marched against Ibn Rashid, who at the
instigation of the Porte had again threatened Kuwet (Koweit), compelled
him to retire to his own territory and took possession of the towns of
Bureda and Aneza. Sheik Mubarak and his allies continued their advance,
defeated Ibn Rashid in two engagements on the 22nd of July and the 26th
of September 1904, and drove him back on his capital, Hail. The Porte
now made another effort to assist its protégé; two columns were
despatched from Medina and Basra respectively, to relieve Hail, and
drive out the Wahhabis. Ahmad Feizi Pasha, in command of the Basra
column, 4200 strong, crossed the desert and reached the wells of Lina,
200 m. from Hail, on the 5th of March 1905; here, however, he received
orders to halt and negotiate before proceeding farther. The Turkish
government realized by this time the strength of the hostile
combination, and in view of the serious state of affairs in Yemen,
hesitated to undertake another campaign in the deserts of Nejd.
Arrangements were accordingly made with the Wahhabis, and on the 10th of
April Ahmad Feizi Pasha left Lina, ostensibly with the object of
protecting the pilgrim road, and joined the Medina column by the end of
the month. Bureda and Aneza were occupied without opposition, the
rebellious sheiks amnestied by the sultan and loaded with gifts, and
formal peace was made between the rival factions.

  History of European influence.

  British intervention in Oman.

European influence was not felt in Arabia until the arrival of the
Portuguese in the eastern seas, following on the discovery of the Cape
route. In 1506 Hormuz was taken by Albuquerque, and Muscat and the coast
of Oman (q.v.) were occupied by the Portuguese till 1650. In 1516 their
fleets appeared in the Red Sea and an unsuccessful attempt was made
against Jidda; but the effective occupation of Yemen by the Turks in the
next few years frustrated any designs the Portuguese may have had in
S.W. Arabia. Even in Oman their hold on the country was limited to
Muscat and the adjacent ports, while the interior was ruled by the old
Yariba (Ya-'aruba) dynasty from their capital at Rustak. The Persian
occupation, which followed that of the Portuguese, came to an end in the
middle of the 18th century, when Ahmad Ibn Said expelled the invaders
and in 1759 established the Ghafari dynasty which still reigns in Oman.
He was succeeded by his son, who in 1798 made a treaty with the East
India Company with the object of excluding the French from Oman, and the
connexion with Great Britain was further strengthened during the long
reign of his grandson Sultan Said, 1804-1856. During the earlier years
of his reign he was constantly at war with the Wahhabi empire, to which
Oman became for a time tributary. The piracies committed by the Jawasimi
Arabs in the gulf compelled the intervention of England, and in 1810
their strongholds were destroyed by a British-Indian expedition. The
overthrow of the Wahhabis in 1817 restored Sultan Said to independence;
he equipped and armed on Western models a fleet built in Indian ports,
and took possession of Sokotra and Zanzibar, as well as the Persian
coast north of the straits of Hormuz as far east as Gwadur, while by his
liberal policy at home Sohar, Barka and Muscat became prosperous
commercial ports.

On his death in 1856 the kingdom was divided, Majid, a younger son,
taking Zanzibar, while the two elder sons contested the succession to
Oman. The eldest, Thuweni, with British support, finally obtained the
throne, and in 1862 an engagement was entered into by the French and
English governments respecting the independence of the sultans of Oman.
He was assassinated in 1866, and his successor, Seyyid Turki, reigned
till 1888. On his death several claimants disputed the succession;
ultimately his son Fesal was recognized by the British government, and
was granted a subsidy from British-Indian revenues, in consideration of
which he engaged not to cede any of his territory without the consent of
the British government; similar engagements have been entered into by
the tribes who occupy the south coast from the borders of Oman westward
to the straits of Bab-el-Mandeb.

  British sphere of influence.

The opening of the overland route to India again brought the west coast
of Arabia into importance. Aden was occupied by the British in 1839. The
Hejaz coast and some of the Yemen ports were still held by Mehemet Ali,
as viceroy of Egypt, but on his final withdrawal from Arabia in 1845,
Hejaz came under direct Turkish rule, and the conquest of Yemen in 1872
placed the whole Red Sea littoral (with the exception of the Midian
coast, ceded by Egypt on the accession of Abbas Hilmi Pasha) under
Ottoman administration. The island of Perim at the southern entrance of
the Red Sea has been a British possession since 1857, while the
promontory of Shekh Said on the Arabian side of the strait is in Turkish
occupation. In order to define the limits between Turkish territory and
that of the independent Arab tribes in political relations with Great
Britain, a joint commission of British and Turkish officers in 1902-1905
laid down a boundary line from Shekh Said to a point on the river Bana,
12 m. north-east of the small town of Kataba, from which it is continued
in a north-easterly direction up to the great desert. This delimitation
places the whole of southern Arabia, east of this line, within the
British sphere of influence, which thus includes the district
surrounding Aden (q.v.), the Hadramut and Oman with its dependencies.

  Turkish rule.

The provinces of Hejaz and Yemen are each administered by a Turkish
governor-general, with headquarters at Taif and Sana respectively; the
country is nominally divided up into divisions and districts under minor
officials, but Turkish rule has never been acquiesced in by the
inhabitants, and beyond the larger towns, all of which are held by
strong garrisons, Turkish authority hardly exists. The powerful Bedouin
tribes of Hejaz have always asserted their independence, and are only
kept quiet by the large money payments made them by the sultan on the
occasion of the annual pilgrimage to the holy cities. A large part of
Asir and northern Yemen has never been visited by Turkish troops, and
such revenues as are collected, mainly from vexatious customs and
transit duties, are quite insufficient to meet the salaries of the
officials, while the troops, ill-fed and their pay indefinitely in
arrears, live on the country as best they can.

  Yemen revolt.

A serious revolt broke out in Yemen in 1892. A Turkish detachment
collecting taxes in the Bani Merwan lands north of Hodeda was destroyed
by a body of Arabs. This reverse set all Yemen aflame; under the
leadership of the imam, who had, since the Turkish occupation, lived in
retirement at Sada, 120 m. north of the capital, the powerful tribes
between Asir and Sana advanced southwards, occupied the principal towns
and besieged the few Turkish fortified posts that still held out. In
many cases the garrisons, Arab troops from Syria, went over to the
insurgents. Meanwhile, reinforcements under General Ahmad Feizi Pasha
reached Hodeda, Manakha was retaken, Sana relieved, and by the end of
January 1893 the country with the exception of the northern mountainous
districts was reconquered.

A state of intermittent rebellion, however, continued, and in 1904 a
general revolt took place with which the normal garrison of Yemen, the
7th army corps, was quite unable to cope. The military posts were
everywhere besieged, and Sana, the capital, was cut off from all
communication with the coast. During February 1905 reinforcements were
sent up which raised the garrison of Sana to a strength of eight
battalions, and in March a further reinforcement of about the same
strength arrived, and fought its way into the capital with the loss of
almost all its guns and train. The position was then desperate,
wholesale desertion and starvation had decimated the garrison, and three
weeks later Ali Riza Pasha, the Turkish commander, was compelled to
surrender. The fall of Sana made a deep impression at Constantinople,
every effort was made to hasten out reinforcements, the veteran Ahmad
Feizi Pasha was nominated to the supreme command, and Anatolian troops
in place of the unreliable Syrian element were detailed. The scale of
the operations may be judged from the fact that the total number of
troops mobilized up to the beginning of July 1905 amounted to 126
battalions, 8 squadrons and 15 batteries; the rebel leader Mahommed
Yahiya had at this time a following of 50,000.

By the end of June, Ahmad Feizi Pasha was in a position to advance on
Manakha, where he organized an efficient transport, rallied the
scattered remnants of Ali Riza's army, and with the newly arrived troops
had by the middle of July a force of some 40 battalions available for
the advance on Sana. He left Manakha on the 17th of July, and after
almost daily fighting reached Sana on the 30th of August; on the 31st he
entered the city without serious opposition, the insurgents having
retreated northward.

  AUTHORITIES.--D.G. Hogarth, _Penetration of Arabia_ (London, 1904); C.
  Niebuhr, _Travels and Description of Arabia_ (Amsterdam, 1774); A.
  Zehme, _Arabien und die Araber seit Hundert Jahren_ (Halle, 1875);
  J.L. Burckhardt, _Travels in Arabia_ (London, 1829); R.F. Burton,
  _Pilgrimage to El Medinah and Meccah_ (London, 1855), _Midian
  revisited_ (1879); W.G. Palgrave, _Central and Eastern Arabia_
  (London, 1865); C. Doughty, _Arabia Deserta_ (Cambridge, 1888), and an
  abridgment, containing mainly the personal narrative, under the title
  of _Wanderings in Arabia_ (London, 1908); L. van den Berg, _Le
  Hadramut et les colonies arabes_, &c. (Batavia, 1885); C. Huber,
  _Journal d'un voyage en Arabie_ (Paris, 1891); J. Euting, _Reise in
  inner Arabien_ (Leiden, 1896); E. Nolde, _Reise nach inner Arabien_
  (Brunswick, 1895); L. Hirsch, _Reise in Sud Arabien_ (Leiden, 1897);
  J.T. Bent, _Southern Arabia_ (1895); R. Manzoni, _Il Yemen_ (Rome,
  1884); A. Deflers, _Voyage en Yémen_ (Paris, 1889); J. Halévy,
  _Journal Asiatique_ (1872); Lady Anne Blunt, _Pilgrimage to Nejd_
  (London, 1881); E. Glaser, _Petermann's Mitt._ (1886, 1888 and 1889);
  W.B. Harris, _Journey through Yemen_ (Edinburgh, 1893); J.R. Wellsted,
  _Travels in Arabia_ (London, 1838); Capt. F.M. Hunter, _Aden_ (London,
  1877). Consult also _Proc. R.G.S._ and _Geogr. Journal_. For geology
  see H.J. Carter, "Memoir on the Geology of the South-East Coast of
  Arabia," _Journ. Bombay Branch Roy. Asiat. Soc._ vol. iv. pp. 21-96
  (1852); Doughty's _Arabia Deserta_; W.F. Hume, _The Rift Valleys and
  Geology of Eastern Sinai_ (London, 1901). For ancient geography of
  Arabia:--A. Sprenger, _Alte Geographie Arabiens_ (Berne, 1875); E.H.
  Bunbury, _History of Ancient Geography_ (London, 1883); D.H. Müller,
  _Hamdani's Geographie_ (Leiden, 1884); E. Glaser, _Geschichte und
  Geographie Arabiens_ (Berlin, 1890).     (R. A. W.)

LITERATURE

The literature of Arabia has its origin in the songs, improvisations,
recitations and stories of the pre-Mahommedan Arabs. Of written
literature in those days there was, so far as we know, none. But where
books failed memory was strong and the power of retaining things heard
was not confined to a professional class. At every festive meeting many
could contribute a poem or a story, many could even improvise the one or
the other. When members of different tribes met in peace (as at the fair
of 'Ukaz) the most skilful reciters strove to maintain the honour of
their own people, and a ready improviser was held in high esteem. The
smartest epigrams, the fairest similes, the keenest satires, spoken or
sung on such occasions, were treasured in the memory of the hearers and
carried by them to their homes. But the experience of all peoples in
that memory requires to be helped by form. Sentences became balanced and
were made clear by some sort of definite ending. The simplest form of
this in Arabian literature is the _saj'_ or rhymed prose, in which the
sentences are usually (though not always) short and end in a rhyme or
assonance. Mahomet used this form in many parts of the Koran (e.g.
_Sura_, 81). The next step was the introduction of metre into the body
of the sentence and the restriction of the passages to a definite
length. This in its simplest form gave rise to the _rajaz_ verses, where
each half-line ends in the same rhyme and consists of three feet of the
measure /u - u -. Other metres were introduced later until sixteen
altogether were recognized. In all forms the rhyme is the same
throughout the poem, and is confined to the second half of the line
except in the first line where the two halves rhyme. While, however,
these measures were in early use, they were not systematically analysed
or their rules enunciated until the time of Khalil ibn Ahmad in the 8th
century. Two other features of Arabian poetry are probably connected
with the necessity for aiding the memory. The first of these is the
requirement that each line should have a complete sense in itself; this
produces a certain jerkiness, and often led among the Arabs to
displacement in the order of the lines in a long poem. The other
feature, peculiar to the long poem (_qasida_, elegy), is that, whatever
its real object, whatever its metre, it has a regular scheme in the
arrangement of its material. It begins with a description of the old
camping-ground, before which the poet calls on his companion to stop,
while he bewails the traces of those who have left for other places.
Then he tells of his love and how he had suffered from it, how he had
journeyed through the desert (this part often contains some of the most
famous descriptions and praises of animals) until his beast became thin
and worn-out. Then at last comes the real subject of the poem, usually
the panegyric of some man of influence or wealth to whom the poet has
come in hope of reward and before whom he recites the poem.

_Poetry._--The influence of the poet in pre-Mahommedan days was very
great. As his name, _ash-Sha'ir_, "the knowing man," indicates, he was
supposed to have more than natural knowledge and power. Panegyric and
satire (_hija'_) were his chief instruments. The praise of the tribe in
well-chosen verses ennobled it throughout the land, a biting satire was
enough to destroy its reputation (cf. I. Goldziher's _Abhandlungen zur
arabischen Philologie_, i. pp. 1-105). Before Mahomet the ethics of the
Arabs were summed up in _muruwwa_ (custom). Hospitality, generosity,
personal bravery were the subjects of praise; meanness and cowardice
those of satire. The existence of poetry among the northern Arabs was
known to the Greeks even in the 4th century (cf. St Nilos in Migne's
_Patrologia Graeca_, vol. 79, col. 648, and Sozomen's _Ecclesiastical
History_, bk. 6, ch. 38). Women as well as men composed and recited
poems before the days of the Prophet (cf. L. Cheikho's _Poetesses of the
Jahiliyya_, in Arabic, Beirut, 1897).

The transmission of early Arabic poetry has been very imperfect. Many of
the reciters were slain in battle, and it was not till the 8th to the
10th centuries and even later that the earliest collections of these
poems were made. Many have to be recovered from grammars, dictionaries,
&c., where single lines or groups of lines are quoted to illustrate the
proper use of words, phrases or idioms. Moreover, many a reciter was not
content to declaim the genuine verses of ancient poets, but interpolated
some of his own composition, and the change of religion introduced by
Islam led to the mutilation of many verses to suit the doctrines of the
new creed.[3]

The language of the poems, as of all the best Arabian literature, was
that of the desert Arabs of central Arabia; and to use it aright was the
ambition of poets and scholars even in the Abbasid period. For the man
of the towns its vocabulary was too copious to be easily understood, and
in the age of linguistic studies many commentaries were written to
explain words and idioms.

Of the pre-Mahommedan poets the most famous were the six whose poems
were collected by Asma'i about the beginning of the 9th century (ed. W.
Ahlwardt, _The Diwans of the Six Ancient Arabic Poets_, London, 1870).
Single poems of four of these--Amru-ul-Qais, Tarafa, Zuhair and
'Antara--appear in the Mo'allakat (q.v.). The other two were Nabigha
(q.v.) and 'Alqama (q.v.). But besides these there were many others
whose names were famous; such as Ta'abbata Sharran, a popular hero who
recites his own adventures with great gusto; his companion Shanfara,
whose fame rests on a fine poem which has been translated into French by
de Sacy (in his _Chrestomathie Arabe_) and into English by G. Hughes
(London, 1896); Aus ibn Hajar of the Bani Tamin, famous for his
descriptions of weapons and hunting scenes (ed. R. Geyer, Vienna, 1892);
Hatim Ta'i, renowned for his open-handed generosity as well as for his
poetry (ed. F. Schulthess, Leipzig, 1897, with German translation); and
'Urwa ibn ul-Ward of the tribe of 'Abs, rival of Hatim in generosity as
well as in poetry (ed. Th. Nöldeke, Göttingen, 1863). Among these early
poets are found one Jew of repute, Samau'al (Samuel) ibn Adiya (cf. Th.
Nöldeke's _Beiträge_, pp. 52-86; art. _s.v._ "Samuel ibn Adiya" in
_Jewish Encyc._ and authorities there quoted), and some Christians such
as 'Adi'ibn Zaid of Hira, who sang alike of the pleasures of drink and
of death (ed. by Louis Cheikho in his _Les Poètes arabes chrétiens_, pp.
439-474, Beirut, 1890; in this work many Arabian poets are considered to
be Christian without sufficient reason). One poet, a younger
contemporary of Mahomet, has attracted much attention because his poems
were religious and he was a monotheist. This is Umayya ibn Abi-s-Salt, a
Meccan who did not accept Islam and died in 630. His poems are discussed
by F. Schulthess in the _Orientalische Studien_ dedicated by Th.
Nöldeke, Giessen, 1906, and his relation to Mahomet by E. Power (in the
_Mélanges de la faculté orientale de l'université Saint-Joseph_, Beirut,
1906). Mahomet's relation to the poets generally was one of antagonism
because of their influence over the Arabs and their devotion to the old
religion and customs. Ka'b ibn Zuhair, however, first condemned to
death, then pardoned, later won great favour for himself by writing a
panegyric of the Prophet (ed. G. Freytag, Halle, 1823). Another poet,
A'sha (q.v.), followed his example. Labid (q.v.) and Hassan ibn Thabit
(q.v.) were also contemporary. Among the poetesses of the time Khansa
(q.v.) is supreme. In the scarcity of poets at this time two others
deserve mention; Abu Mihjan, who made peace with Islam in 630 but was
exiled for his love of wine, which he celebrated in his verse (ed. L.
Abel, Leiden, 1887; cf. C. Landberg's _Primeurs arabes_, 1, Leiden,
1886), and Jarwal ibn Aus, known as al-Hutai'a, a wandering poet whose
keen satires led to his imprisonment by Omar (Poems, ed. by I. Goldziher
in the _Journal of the German Oriental Society_, vols. 46 and 47).

Had the simplicity and religious severity of the first four caliphs
continued in their successors, the fate of poetry would have been hard.
Probably little but religious poetry would have been allowed. But the
Omayyads (with one exception) were not religious men and, while
preserving the outward forms of Islam, allowed full liberty to the
pre-Islamic customs of the Arabs and the beliefs and practices of
Christians. At the same time the circumstances of the poet's life were
altered. Poetry depended on patronage, and that was to be had now
chiefly in the court of the caliph and the residences of his governors.
Hence the centre of attraction was now the city with its interests, not
the desert. Yet the old forms of poetry were kept. The _qasida_ still
required the long introduction (see above), which was entirely occupied
with the affairs of the desert. Thus poetry became more and more
artificial, until in the Abbasid period poets arose who felt themselves
strong enough to give up the worn-out forms and adopt others more
suitable. The names of three great poets adorn the Omayyad period:
Akhtal, Farazdaq and Jarir were contemporaries (see separate articles).
The first was a Christian of the tribe of Taghlib, whose Christianity
enabled him to write many verses which would have been impossible to a
professing Moslem. Protected by the caliph he employed the old weapons
of satire to support them against the "Helpers" and to exalt his own
tribe against the Qaisites. Farazdaq of the Bani Tamim, a good Moslem
but loose in morals, lived chiefly in Medina and Kufa, and was renowned
for his command of language. Jarir of another branch of the Bani Tamim
lived in Irak and courted the favour of Hajjaj, its governor. His
satires were so effective that he is said to have crushed forty-three
rivals. His great efforts were against Farazdaq, who was supported by
Akhtal (cf. _The Naka'id of Jarir and al-Farazdaq_, ed. A.A. Bevan,
Leiden, 1906 foll.). Among many minor poets one woman is conspicuous.
Laila ul-Akhyaliyya (d. 706) was married to a stranger. On the death of
her lover in battle, she wrote numerous elegies bewailing him, and so
became famous and devoted the rest of her life to the writing of verse.
Two poets of the Koreish attained celebrity in Arabia itself at this
time. Qais ur-Ruqayyat was the poet of 'Abdallah ibn uz-Zubair (Abdallah
ibn Zobair) and helped him until circumstances went against him, when he
made his peace with the caliph. His poems are chiefly panegyrics and
love songs (ed. N. Rhodonakis, Vienna, 1902). 'Umar ibn Abi Rabi'a (c.
643-719) was a wealthy man, who lived a life of ease in his native town
of Mecca, and devoted himself to intrigues and writing love songs (ed.
P. Schwarz, Leipzig, 1901-1902). His poems were very popular throughout
Arabia. As a dweller in the town he was independent of the old forms of
poetry, which controlled all others, but his influence among poets was
not great enough to perpetuate the new style. One other short-lived
movement of the Omayyad period should be mentioned. The _rajaz_ poems
(see above) had been a subordinate class generally used for
improvisations in pre-Mahommedan times. In the 7th and 8th centuries,
however, a group of poets employed them more seriously. The most
celebrated of these were 'Ajjaj and his son Ru'ba of the Bani Tamim
(editions by W. Ahlwardt, Berlin, 1903; German trans. of Ru'ba's poems
by Ahlwardt, Berlin, 1904).

With the establishment of the Abbasid dynasty, a new epoch in Arabian
poetry began. The stereotyped beginning of the _qasida_ had been
recognized as antiquated and out of place in city life even in the
Omayyad period (cf. Goldziher, _Abhandlungen_, i. 144 ff). This form had
been ridiculed but now it lost its hold altogether, and was only
employed occasionally by way of direct imitation of the antique. The
rise of Persian influence made itself felt in much the same way as the
Norman influence in England by bringing a newer refinement into poetry.
Tribal feuds are no longer the main incentives to verse. Individual
experiences of life and matters of human interest become more usual
subjects. Cynicism, often followed by religion in a poet's later life,
is common. The tumultuous mixture of interests and passions to be found
in a city like Bagdad are the subjects of a poet's verse. One of the
earliest of these poets, Muti' ibn Ayas, shows the new depth of personal
feeling and refinement of expression. Bashshar ibn Burd (d. 783), a
blind poet of Persian descent, shows the ascendancy of Persian influence
as he openly rails at the Arabs and makes clear his own leaning to the
Persian religion. In the 8th century Abu Nuwas (q.v.) is the greatest
poet of his time. His language has the purity of the desert, his morals
are those of the city, his universalism is that of the man of the world.
Abu-l-'Atahiya (q.v.), his contemporary, is fluent, simple and often
didactic. Muslim ibn ul-Walid (ed. de Goeje, Leiden, 1875), also
contemporary, is more conservative of old forms and given to panegyric
and satire. In the 9th century two of the best-known poets--Abu Tammam
(q.v.) and Buhturi (q.v.) --were renowned for their knowledge of old
poetry (see HAMASA) and were influenced by it in their own verse. On the
other hand Ibn ul-Mo'tazz (son of the caliph) was the writer of
brilliant occasional verse, free of all imitation. In the 10th century
the centre of interest is in the court of Saif ud-Daula (addaula) at
Aleppo. Here in Motanabbi (q.v.) the claims of modern poetry not only to
equal but to excel the ancient were put forward and in part at any rate
recognized. Abu Firas (932-968) was a member of the family of Saif
ud-Daula, a soldier whose poems have all the charm that comes from the
fact that the writer has lived through the events he narrates (ed. by R.
Dvorák, Leiden, 1895). Many Arabian writers count Motanabbi the last of
the great poets. Yet Abu-l-'Ala ul-Ma'arri (q.v.) was original alike in
his use of rhymes and in the philosophical nature of his poems. Ibn
Farid (q.v.) is the greatest of the mystic poets, and Busiri (q.v.)
wrote the most famous poem extant in praise of the Prophet. In the
provinces of the caliphate there were many poets, who, however, seldom
produced original work. Spain, however, produced Ibn 'Abdun (d. 1126),
famous for the grace and finish of his style (ed. with commentary of Ibn
Badrun by R.P.A. Dozy, Leiden, 1846). The Sicilian Ibn Hamdis
(1048-1132) spent the last fifty years of his life in Spain (_Diwan_,
ed. Moaçada, Palermo, 1883; _Canzoniere_, ed. Schiaparelli, Rome, 1897).
It was also apparently in this country that the strophe form was first
used in Arabic poems (cf. M. Hartmann's _Das arabische Strophengedicht_,
Weimar, 1897), and Ibn Quzman (12th century), a wandering singer, here
first used the language of everyday life in the form of verse known as
_Zajal_.

_Anthologies._--As supplemental to the account of poetry may be
mentioned here some of the chief collections of ancient verse, sometimes
made for the sake of the poems themselves, sometimes to give a _locus
classicus_ for usages of grammar or lexicography, sometimes to
illustrate ancient manners and customs. The earliest of these is the
_Mo'allakat_ (q.v.). In the 8th century Ibn Mofaddal compiled the
collection named after him the _Mofaddaliyat_. From the 9th century we
have the Hamasas of Abu Tammam and Buhturi, and a collection of poems of
the tribe Hudhail (second half ed. in part by J.G.L. Kosegarten, London,
1854; completed by J. Wellhausen in _Skizzen und Vorarbeiten_, i.
Berlin, 1884). The numerous quotations of Ibn Qutaiba (q.v.) in the
'Uyun ul-Akhbar (ed. C. Brockelmann, Strassburg, 1900 ff.) and the _Book
of Poetry and Poets_ (ed. M.J. de Goeje, Leiden, 1904) bring these works
into this class. In the 10th century were compiled the _Jamharat ash'ar
al Arab_, containing forty-nine poems (ed. Bulaq, 1890), the work
_al-'Iqd ul-Farid_ of Ibn' Abdi-r-Rabbihi (ed. Cairo, various years),
and the greatest work of all this class, the _Kitab ul-Aghani_ ("Book of
Songs") (cf. ABU-L FARAJ). The 12th century contributes the _Diwan
Mukhtarat ush-Shu'ara'i_ with fifty qasidas. The _Khizanai ul-Adab_ of
Abdulqadir, written in the 17th century in the form of a commentary on
verses cited in a grammar, contains much old verse (ed. 4 vols., Bulaq,
1882).

_Belles-Lettres and Romances._--Mahomet in the Koran had made extensive
use of _saj'_ or rhymed prose (see above). This form then dropped out of
use almost entirely for some time. In the 10th century, however, it was
revived, occurring almost simultaneously in the _Sermons_ of Ibn Nubata
(946-984) and the _Letters_ of Abu Bakr ul-Khwarizmi. Both have been
published several times in the East. The epistolary style was further
cultivated by Hamadhani (q.v.) and carried to perfection by Abu-l'Ala
ul-Ma'arri. Hamadhini was also the first to write in this rhymed prose a
new form of work, the _Maqama_ ("assembly"). The name arose from the
fact that scholars were accustomed to assemble for the purpose of
rivalling one another in orations showing their knowledge of Arabic
language, proverb and verse. In the _Maqamas_ of Hamadhani a narrator
describes how in various places he met a wandering scholar who in these
assemblies puts all his rivals to shame by his eloquence. Each oration
forms the substance of a _Maqama_, while the _Maqamas_ themselves are
united to one another by the constant meetings of narrator and scholar.
Hariri (q.v.) quite eclipsed the fame of his predecessor in this
department, and his _Maqamas_ retain their influence over Arabian
literature to the present day. As late as the 19th century the sheik
Nasif ul Yaziji (1800-1871) distinguished himself by writing sixty
clever _Maqamas_ in the style of Hariri (ed. Beirut, 1856, 1872). While
this class of literature had devoted itself chiefly to the finesses of
the language, another set of works was given to meeting the requirements
of moral education and the training of a gentleman. This, which is known
as "Adab literature," is anecdotic in style with much quotation of early
poetry and proverb. Thus government, war, friendship, morality, piety,
eloquence, are some of the titles under which Ibn Qutaiba groups his
stories and verses in the _'Uyun ul Akhbar_. _Jahiz_ (q.v.) in the 9th
century and Baihaqi (_The Kitab al-Mahasin val-Masawi_, ed. F. Schwally,
Giessen, 1900-1902) early in the 10th, wrote works of this class. A
little later a Spaniard, Ibn 'Abdrabbihi (Abdi-r-Rabbihi), wrote his
_'Iqd ul-Farid_ (see section _Anthologies_). The growth of city life in
the Abbasid capital led to the desire for a new form of story, differing
from the old tales of desert life. This was met in the first place by
borrowing. In the 8th century Ibn Muqaffa', a convert from Mazdaism to
Islam, translated the Pahlavi version of Bidpai's fables (itself a
version of the Indian _Panchatantra_) into Arabic with the title _Kalila
wa Dimna_ (ed. Beirut, various years). Owing to the purity of its
language and style it has remained a classic work. The _Book of the 1001
Nights_ (_Arabian Nights_) also has its basis in translations from the
Indian through the Persian, made as early as the 9th century. To these
stories have been added others originating in Bagdad and Egypt and a few
others, which were at first in independent circulation. The whole work
seems to have taken its present form (with local variations) about the
13th century. Several other romances of considerable length are extant,
such as the _Story of 'Antar_ (ed. 32 vols., Cairo, 1869, &c.,
translated in part by Terrick Hamilton, 4 vols., London, 1820), and the
_Story of Saif ibn Dhi Yezen_ (ed. Cairo, 1892).     (G. W. T.)

_Historical Literature._--Arabian historians differ from all others in
the unique form of their compositions. Each event is related in the
words of eye-witnesses or contemporaries transmitted to the final
narrator through a chain of intermediate reporters (_rawis_), each of
whom passed on the original report to his successor. Often the same
account is given in two or more slightly divergent forms, which have
come down through different chains of reporters. Often, too, one event
or one important detail is told in several ways on the basis of several
contemporary statements transmitted to the final narrator through
distinct lines of tradition. The writer, therefore, exercises no
independent criticism except as regards the choice of authorities; for
he rejects accounts of which the first author or one of the intermediate
links seems to him unworthy of credit, and sometimes he states which of
several accounts seems to him the best.

A second type of Arabian historiography is that in which an author
combines the different traditions about one occurrence into one
continuous narrative, but prefixes a statement as to the lines of
authorities used and states which of them he mainly follows. In this
case the writer recurs to the first method, already described, only when
the different traditions are greatly at variance with one another. In
yet a third type of history the old method is entirely forsaken and we
have a continuous narrative only occasionally interrupted by citation of
the authority for some particular point. But the principle still is that
what has been well said once need not be told again in other words. The
writer, therefore, keeps as close as he can to the letter of his
sources, so that quite a late writer often reproduces the very words of
the first narrator.

From very early times story-tellers and singers found their subjects in
the doughty deeds of the tribe on its forays, and sometimes in contests
with foreign powers and in the impression produced by the wealth and
might of the sovereigns of Persia and Constantinople. The appearance of
the Prophet with the great changes that ensued, the conquests that made
the Arabs lords of half the civilized world, supplied a vast store of
new matter for relations which men were never weary of hearing and
recounting. They wished to know everything about the apostle of God.
Every one who had known or seen him was questioned and was eager to
answer. Moreover, the word of God in the Koran left many practical
points undecided, and therefore it was of the highest importance to know
exactly how the Prophet had spoken and acted in various circumstances.
Where could this be better learned than at Medina, where he had lived so
long and where the majority of his companions continued to live? So at
Medina a school was gradually formed, where the chief part of the
traditions about Mahomet and his first successors took a form more or
less fixed. Soon men began to assist memory by making notes, and pupils
sought to take written jottings of what they had heard from their
teachers. Thus by the close of the 1st century many _dictata_ were
already in circulation. For example, Hasan of Basra (d. 728 A.D.) had a
great mass of such notes, and he was accused of sometimes passing off as
oral tradition things he had really drawn from books; for oral tradition
was still the one recognized authority, and it is related of more than
one old scholar, and even of Hasan of Basra himself, that he directed
his books to be burned at his death. The books were mere helps. Long
after this date, when all scholars drew mainly from books, the old forms
were still kept up. Tabari, for example, when he cites a book expresses
himself as if he had heard what he quotes from the master with whom he
read the passage or from whose copy he transcribed it. He even expresses
himself in this wise: "'Omar b. Shabba has _related_ to me in his book
on the history of Basra." No independent book of the 1st century from
the Flight (i.e. 622-719) has come down to us. It is told, however, that
Moawiya summoned an old man named 'Abid ibn Sharya from Yemen to
Damascus to tell him all he knew about ancient history and that he
induced him to write down his information. This very likely formed the
nucleus of a book which bore the name of that sheik and was much read in
the 3rd century from the Flight. It seems to be lost now. But in the 2nd
century (719-816) real books began to be composed. The materials were
supplied in the first place by oral tradition, in the second by the
_dictata_ of older scholars, and finally by various kinds of documents,
such as treaties, letters, collections of poetry and genealogical lists.
Genealogical studies had become necessary through Omar's system of
assigning state pensions to certain classes of persons according to
their kinship with the Prophet, or their deserts during his lifetime.
This subject received much attention even in the 1st century, but books
about it were first written in the 2nd, the most famous being those of
Ibn al-Kalbi (d. 763), of his son Hisham (d. 819), and of Al-Sharqi ibn
al-Qutami. Genealogy, which often called for elucidations, led on to
history. Baladhuri's excellent _Ansab al-Ashraf_ (Genealogies of the
Nobles) is a history of the Arabs on a genealogical plan.

The oldest extant history is the biography of the Prophet by Ibn Ishaq
(d. 767). This work is generally trustworthy. Mahomet's life before he
appeared as a prophet and the story of his ancestors are indeed mixed
with many fables illustrated by spurious verses. But in Ibn Ishaq's day
these fables were generally accepted as history--for many of them had
been first related by contemporaries of Mahomet--and no one certainly
thought it blameworthy to put pious verses in the mouth of the Prophet's
forefathers, though, according to the _Fihrist_ (p. 92), Ibn Ishaq was
duped by others with regard to the poems he quotes. The original work of
Ibn Ishaq seems to be lost. That which we possess is an edition of it by
Ibn Hisham (d. 834) with additions and omissions (text ed. by F.
Wüstenfeld, Göttingen, 1858-1860; German translation by Weil, Stuttgart,
1864).

The _Life_ of the Prophet by Ibn Oqba (d. 758), based on the statements
of two very trustworthy men, 'Urwa ibn az-Zubair (d. 713) and Az-zuhri
(d. 742), was still much read in Syria in the 14th century. Fragments of
this have been edited by E. Sachau, Berlin, 1904. We fortunately possess
the _Book of the Campaigns_ of the Prophet by al-Waqidi (d. 822) and the
important _Book of Classes_ of his disciple Ibn Sa'd (q.v.). Waqidi had
much more copious materials than Ibn Ishaq, but gives way much more to a
popular and sometimes romancing style of treatment. Nevertheless he
sometimes helps us to recognize in Ibn Ishaq's narrative modifications
of the genuine tradition made for a purpose, and the additional details
he supplies set various events before us in a clearer light. Apart from
this his chief merits lie in his studies on the subject of the
traditional authorities, the results of which are given by Ibn Sa'd, and
in his chronology, which is often excellent. A special study of the
traditions about the conquest of Syria made by M.J. de Goeje in 1864
(_Mémoires sur la conquête de la Syrie_, 2nd ed., Leiden, 1900), led to
the conclusion that Waqidi's chronology is sound as regards the main
events, and that later historians have gone astray by forsaking his
guidance. This result has been confirmed by certain contemporary notices
found by Th. Nöldeke in 1874 in a Syriac MS. of the British Museum. And
that Ibn Ishaq agrees with Waqidi in certain main dates is important
evidence for the trustworthiness of the former also. For the chronology
before the year 10 of the Flight Waqidi did his best, but here, the
material being defective, many of his conclusions are precarious. Waqidi
had already a great library at his disposal. He is said to have had 600
chests of books, chiefly _dictata_ written by or for himself, but in
part real books by Abu Mikhnaf (d. 748), Ibn Ishaq (whom he uses but
does not name), 'Awana (d. 764), Abu Mashar (d. 791) and other authors.
Abu Mikhnaf left a great number of monographs on the chief events from
the death of the Prophet to the caliphate of Walid II. These were much
used by later writers, and we have many extracts from them, but none of
the works themselves except a sort of romance based on his account of
the death of Hosain (Husain) of which Wüstenfeld has given a
translation. With regard to the history of Irak in particular he was
deemed to have the best information, and for this subject he is Tabari's
chief source, just as Madaini, a younger contemporary of Waqidi, is
followed by preference in all that relates to Khorasan. Madaini's
_History of the Caliphs_ is the best, if not the oldest, published
before Tabari; but this book is known only by the excerpts given by
later writers, particularly Baladhuri and Tabari. From these we judge
that he had great narrative power, with much clear and exact learning,
and must be placed high as a critical historian. His plan was to record
the various traditions about an event, choosing them with critical
skill; sometimes, however, he fused the several traditions into a
continuous narrative. A just estimate of the relative value of the
historians can only be reached by careful comparison in detail. This has
been essayed by Brünnow in his study on the Kharijites (Leiden, 1884),
in which the narrative of Mubarrad in the Kamil is compared with the
excerpts of Madaini given by Baladhuri and those of Abu Mikhnaf given by
Tabari. The conclusion reached is that Abu Mikhnaf and Madaini are both
well informed and impartial.

Among the contemporaries of Waqidi and Madaini were Ibn Khidash (d.
838), the historian of the family Muhallab, whose work was one of
Mubarrad's sources for the _History of the Kharijites_; Haitham ibn 'Adi
(d. 822), whose works, though now lost, are often cited; and Saif ibn
'Omar at-Tamimi, whose book on the revolt of the tribes under Abu-Bekr
and on the Mahommedan conquests was much used by Tabari. His narratives
are detailed and often tinged with romance, and he is certainly much
inferior to Waqidi in accuracy. Wellhausen has thoroughly examined the
work of Saif in _Skizzen und Vorarbeiten_, vi. Besides these are to be
mentioned Abu 'Ubaida (d. 825), who was celebrated as a philologist and
wrote several historical monographs that are often cited, and Azraqi,
whose excellent _History of Mecca_ was published after his death by his
grandson (d. 858). With these writers we pass into the 3rd century of
Islam. But we have still an important point to notice in the 2nd
century; for in it learned Persians began to take part in the creation
of Arabic historical literature. Ibn Muqaffa' translated the great _Book
of Persian Kings_, and others followed his example. Tabari and his
contemporaries, senior and junior, such as Ibn Qutaiba, Ya'qubi,
Dinawari, preserve to us a good part of the information about Persian
history made known through such translations.[4] But even more important
than the knowledge conveyed by these works was their influence on
literary style and composition. Half a century later began versions from
the Greek either direct or through the Syriac. The pieces translated
were mostly philosophical; but the Arabs also learned something, however
superficially, of ancient history.

The 3rd century (816-913) was far more productive than the 2nd. Abu
'Ubaida was succeeded by Ibn al-A'rabi (d. 846), who in like manner was
chiefly famous as a philologist, and who wrote about ancient poems and
battles. Much that he wrote is quoted in Tabrizi's commentary on the
_Hamasa_, which is still richer in extracts from the historical
elucidations of early poems given by ar-Riyashi (d. 871). Of special
fame as a genealogist was Ibn Habib (d. 859), of whom we have a booklet
on Arabian tribal names (ed. Wüstenfeld, 1850). Azraqi again was
followed by Fakihi, who wrote a _History of Mecca_ in 885,[5] and 'Omar
b. Shabba (d. 876), who composed an excellent history of Basra, known to
us only by excerpts. Of the works of Zubair b. Bakkar (d. 870), one of
Tabari's teachers, a learned historian and genealogist much consulted by
later writers, there is a fragment in the Köprülü library at
Constantinople, and another in Göttingen, part of which has been made
known by Wüstenfeld (_Die Familie Al-Zobair_, Göttingen, 1878). Ya'qubi
(Ibn Wadih) wrote a short general history of much value (published by
Houtsma, Leiden, 1883). About India he knows more than his predecessors
and more than his successors down to Beruni. Ibn Khordadhbeh's
historical works are lost. Ibn 'Abdalhakam (d. 871) wrote of the
conquest of Egypt and the West. Extracts from this book are given by
M'G. de Slane in his _Histoire des Berbères_, from which we gather that
it was a medley of true tradition and romance, and must be reckoned,
with the book of his slightly senior contemporary, the Spaniard Ibn
Habib, in the class of historical romances. A high place must be
assigned to the historian Ibn Qutaiba or Kotaiba (d. 889), who wrote a
very useful _Handbook of History_ (ed. Wüstenfeld, Göttingen, 1850).
Much more eminent is Baladhuri (d. 893), whose book on the Arab conquest
(ed. M.J. de Goeje, Leiden, 1865-1866) merits the special praise given
to it by Mas'udi, and who also wrote a large work, the _Ansab
al-Ashraf_. A contemporary, Ibn abi Tahir Taifur (d. 894), wrote on the
Abbasid caliphs and was drawn on by Tabari. The sixth part of his work
is in the British Museum. The universal history of Dinawari (d. 896),
entitled _The Long Narratives_, has been edited by Girgas (1887).

All these histories are more or less thrown into the shade by the great
work of Tabari (q.v.), whose fame has never faded from his own day to
ours. The _Annals_ (ed. M. de Goeje, Leiden, 1879-1901) are a general
history from the creation to 302 A.H. (= A.D. 915). As a literary
composition they do not rank very high, which may be due partly to the
author's years, partly to the inequality of his sources, sometimes
superabundant, sometimes defective, partly perhaps to the somewhat hasty
condensation of his original draft. Nevertheless the value of the book
is very great: the author's selection of traditions is usually happy,
and the episodes of most importance are treated with most fulness of
detail, so that it deserves the high reputation it has enjoyed from the
first. This reputation rose steadily; there were twenty copies (one of
them written by Tabari's own hand) in the library of the Fatimite caliph
'Aziz (latter half of the 4th century), whereas, when Saladin became
lord of Egypt, the princely library contained 1200 copies (Maqrizi, i.
408 seq.).

The _Annals_ soon came to be dealt with in various ways. They were
published in shorter form with the omission of the names of authorities
and of most of the poems cited; some passages quoted by later writers
are not found even in the Leiden edition. On the other hand, some
interpolations took place, one in the author's lifetime and perhaps by
his own hand. Then many supplements were written, e.g. by Ferghani (not
extant) and by Hamadhani (partly preserved in Paris). 'Arib of Cordova
made an abridgment, adding the history of the West and continuing the
story to about 975.[6] Ibn Mashkawaih wrote a history from the creation
to 980, with the purpose of drawing the lessons of the story, following
Tabari closely, as far as his book is known, and seldom recurring to
other sources before the reign of Moqtadir; what follows is his own
composition and shows him to be a writer of talent.[7] In 963 an
abridgment of the _Annals_ was translated into Persian by Bal'ami, who,
however, interwove many fables.[8] Ibn al-Athir (d. 1234) abridged the
whole work, usually with judgment, but sometimes too hastily. Though he
sometimes glided lightly over difficulties, his work is of service in
fixing the text of Tabari. He also furnished a continuation to the year
1224. Later writers took Tabari as their main authority, but sometimes
consulted other sources, and so add to our knowledge--especially Ibn
al-Jauzi (d. 1201), who adds many important details. These later
historians had valuable help from the biographies of famous men and
special histories of countries and cities, dynasties and princes, on
which much labour was spent from the 4th century from the Flight
onwards.

The chief historians after Tabari may be briefly mentioned in
chronological order. Razi (d. A.D. 932) wrote a _History of Spain_;
Eutychius (d. 940) wrote _Annals_ (ed. L. Cheikho, Paris, 1906), which
are very important because he gives the Christian tradition; Suli (d.
946) wrote on the Abbasid caliphs, their viziers and court poets;
Mas'udi (q.v.) composed various historical and geographical works (d.
956). Of Tabari's contemporary Hamza Ispahani (c. 940) we have the
Annals (ed. Gottwaldt, St Petersburg, 1844); Ibn al-Qutiya wrote a
_History of Spain_; Ibn Zulaq (d. 997) a _History of Egypt_; 'Otbi wrote
the _History of Mahmud of Ghazna_, at whose court he lived (printed on
the margin of the Egyptian edition of Ibn al-Athir); Tha'labi (d. 1036)
wrote a well-known _History of the Old Prophets_; Abu Nu'aim al-Ispahani
(d. 1039) wrote a _History of Ispahan_, chiefly of the scholars of that
city; Tha'alibi (d. c. 1038) wrote, _inter alia_, a well-known _History
of the Poets of his Time_, published at Damascus, 1887; Biruni (q.v.)
(d. 1048) takes a high place among historians; Koda'i (d. 1062) wrote a
_Description of Egypt_ and also various historical pieces, of which some
are extant; Ibn Sa'id of Cordova (d. 1070) wrote a _View of the History
of the Various Nations_. Bagdad and its learned men found an excellent
historian in al-Khatib al-Baghdadi (d. 1071), and Spain in Ibn Hayan (d.
1076), and half a century later in Ibn Khaqan (d. 1135) and Ibn Bassam
(d. 1147). Sam'ani (d. 1167) wrote an excellent book on genealogies;
'Umara (d. 1175) wrote a _History of Yemen_ (ed. H.C. Kay, London,
1892); Ibn 'Asaqir (d. 1176) a _History of Damascus and her Scholars_,
which is of great value, and exists in whole or in part in several
libraries. The _Biographical Dictionary_ of the Spaniard Ibn Pascual (d.
1182) and that of Dabbi, a somewhat junior contemporary, are edited in
Codera's _Bibliotheca Arab. Hisp._ (1883-1885); Saladin found his
historian in the famous 'Imad uddin (d. 1201) (Arabic text, ed. C.
Landberg, Leiden, 1888). Ibn ul-Jauzi, who died in the same year, has
been already mentioned. Abdulwahid's _History of the Almohades_, written
in 1224, was published by Dozy (2nd ed., 1881). Abdullatif or Abdallatif
(d. 1232) is known by his writings about Egypt (trans. de Sacy, 1810);
Ibn al-Athir (d. 1233) wrote, in addition to the _Chronicle_ already
mentioned, a _Biographical Dictionary of Contemporaries of the Prophet_.
Qifti (d. 1248) is especially known by his _History of Arabic
Philologists_. Sibt ibn al-Jauzi (d. 1256), grandson of the Ibn al-Jauzi
already mentioned, wrote a great _Chronicle_, of which much the larger
part still exists. Codera has edited (Madrid, 1886) Ibn al-'Abbar's (d.
1260) _Biographical Lexicon_, already known by Dozy's excerpts from it.
Ibn al-'Adim (d. 1262) is famed for his _History of Aleppo_, and Abu
Shama (d. 1267) wrote a well-known _History of Saladin and Nureddin_,
taking a great deal from 'Imad uddin. Ibn abi Usaibia (d. 1269) wrote a
_History of Physicians_, ed. A. Müller. The _History_ of Ibn al-'Amid
(d. 1276), better known as Elmacin, was printed by Erpenius in 1625. Ibn
Sa'id al-Maghribi (d. 1274 or 1286) is famous for his histories, but
still more for his geographical writings. The noted theologian Nawawi
(q.v.; d. 1278) wrote a _Biographical Dictionary of the Worthies of the
First Ages of Islam_. Preeminent as a biographer is Ibn Khallikan (q.v.;
d. 1282), whose much-used work was partly edited by de Slane and
completely by Wüstenfeld (1835-1840), and translated into English by the
former scholar (4 vols., 1843-1871).

Abu 'l-Faraj, better known as Bar-Hebraeus (d. 1286), wrote, besides his
Syriac _Chronicle_, an Arabic _History of Dynasties_ (ed. E. Pocock,
Oxford, 1663, Beirut, 1890). Ibn 'Adhari's _History of Africa and Spain_
has been published by Dozy (2 vols., Leiden, 1848-1851), and the
_Qartas_ of Ibn abi Zar' by Tornberg (1843). One of the best-known of
Arab writers is Abulfeda (d. 1331) (q.v.). Not less famous is the great
_Encyclopaedia_ of his contemporary Nuwairi (d. 1332), but only extracts
from it have been printed. Ibn Sayyid an-Nas (d. 1334) wrote a full
biography of the Prophet; Mizzi (d. 1341) an extensive work on the men
from whom traditions have been derived. We still possess, nearly
complete, the great _Chronicle_ of Dhahabi (d. 1347), a very learned
biographer and historian. The geographical and historical _Masalik
al-Absar_ of Ibn Fadlallah (d. 1348) is known at present by extracts
given by Quatremère and Amari. Ibn al-Wardi (d. c. 1349), best known by
his _Cosmography_, wrote a _Chronicle_ which has been printed in Egypt.
Safadi (d., 1363) got a great name as a biographer. Yafi'i (d. 1367)
wrote a _Chronicle of Islam_ and _Lives of Saints_. Subki (d. 1369)
published _Lives of the Theologians of the Shafi'ite School_. Of Ibn
Kathir's _History_ the greatest part is extant. For the history of Spain
and the Maghrib the writings of Ibn al-Khatib (d. 1374) are of
acknowledged value. Another history, of which we possess the greater
part, is the large work of Ibn al-Furat (d. 1404). Far superior to all
these, however, is the famous Ibn Khaldun (q.v.) (d. 1406). Of the
historical works of the famous lexicographer Fairuzabadi (q.v.) (d.
1414) only a _Life of the Prophet_ remains. Maqrizi (d. 1442) is the
subject of a separate article; Ibn Hajar (d. 1448) is best known by his
_Biographical Dictionary of Contemporaries of the Prophet_, published in
the _Bibliotheca Indica_. Ibn 'Arabshah (d. 1450) is known by his
_History of Timur_ (Leeuwarden, 1767). 'Aini (d. 1451) wrote a _General
History_, still extant. Abu'l-Mahasin ibn Taghribirdi (d. 1469) wrote at
length on the history of Egypt; the first two parts have been published
by Juynboll and Matthes, Leiden, 1855-1861. Flügel has published Ibn
Kotlubogha's _Biographies of the Hanifite Jurists_. Ibn Shihna (d. 1485)
wrote a _History of Aleppo_. Of Sakhawi we possess a bibliographical
work on the historians. The polymath Suyuti (q.v.) (d. 1505) contributed
a _History of the Caliphs_ and many biographical pieces. Samhudi's
_History of Medina_ is known through the excerpts of Wüstenfeld (1861).
Ibn Iyas (d. 1524) wrote a _History of Egypt_, and Diarbekri (d. 1559) a
_Life of Mahomet_. To these names must be added Maqqari (Makkari) (q.v.)
and Hajji Khalifa (q.v.) (d. 1658). He made use of European sources, and
with him Arabic historiography may be said to cease, though he had some
unimportant successors.

A word must be said of the historical romances, the beginnings of which
go back to the first centuries of Islam. The interest in all that
concerned Mahomet and in the allusions of the Koran to old prophets and
races led many professional narrators to choose these subjects. The
increasing veneration paid to the Prophet and love for the marvellous
soon gave rise to fables about his childhood, his visit to heaven, &c.,
which have found their way even into sober histories, just as many
Jewish legends told by the converted Jew Ka'b al-Ahbar and by Wahb ibn
Monabbih, and many fables about the old princes of Yemen told by 'Abid,
are taken as genuine history (see, however, Mas'udi, iv. 88 seq.). A
fresh field for romantic legend was found in the history of the
victories of Islam, the exploits of the first heroes of the faith, the
fortunes of 'Ali and his house. Then, too, history was often expressly
forged for party ends. The people accepted all this, and so a romantic
tradition sprang up side by side with the historical, and had a
literature of its own, the beginnings of which must be placed as early
as the 2nd century of the Flight. The oldest specimens still extant are
the fables about the conquest of Spain ascribed to Ibn Habib (d. 852),
and those about the conquest of Egypt and the West by Ibn 'Abd al-Hakam
(d. 871). In these truth and falsehood are mingled. But most of the
extant literature of this kind is, in its present form, much more
recent; e.g. the _Story of the Death of Hosain_ by the pseudo-Abu
Mikhnaf (translated by Wüstenfeld); the _Conquest of Syria_ by Abu
Isma'il al-Basri (edited by Nassau Lees, Calcutta, 1854, and discussed
by de Goeje, 1864); the pseudo-Waqidi (see Hamaker, _De Expugnatione
Memphidis et Alexandriae_, Leiden, 1835); the pseudo-Ibn Qutaiba (see
Dozy, _Recherches_); the book ascribed to A'sam Kufi, &c. Further
inquiry into the origin of these works is called for, but some of them
were plainly directed to stirring up fresh zeal against the Christians.
In the 6th century of the Flight some of these books had gained so much
authority that they were used as sources, and thus many untruths crept
into accepted history. (M. J. de G.; G. W. T.)

  _Geography._--The writing of geographical books naturally began with
  the description of the Moslem world, and that for practical purposes.
  Ibn Khordadhbeh, in the middle of the 9th century, wrote a _Book of
  Roads and Provinces_ to give an account of the highways, the
  posting-stations and the revenues of the provinces. In the same
  century Ya'qubi wrote his _Book of Countries_, describing specially
  the great cities of the empire. A similar work describing the
  provinces in some detail was that of Qudama or Kodama (d. 922).
  Hamdani (q.v.) was led to write his great geography of Arabia by his
  love for the ancient history of his land. Muqaddasi (Mokaddasi) at the
  end of the 10th century was one of the early travellers whose works
  were founded on their own observation. The study of Ptolemy's
  geography led to a wider outlook, and the writing of works on
  geography (q.v.) in general. A third class of Arabian geographical
  works were those written to explain the names of places which occur in
  the older poets. Such books were written by Bakri (q.v.) and Yaqut
  (q.v.)[9]

  _Grammar and Lexicography._--Arab tradition ascribes the first
  grammatical treatment of the language to Abu-l-Aswad ud-Du'ali (latter
  half of the 7th century), but the certain beginnings of Arabic grammar
  are found a hundred years later. The Arabs from early times have
  always been proud of their language, but its systematic study seems to
  have arisen from contact with Persian and from the respect for the
  language of the Koran. In Irak the two towns of Basra and Kufa
  produced two rival schools of philologists. Bagdad soon had one of its
  own (cf. G. Flügel's _Die grammatischen Schulen der Araber_, Leipzig,
  1862). Khalil ibn Ahmad (718-791), an Arab from Oman, of the school of
  Basra, was the first to enunciate the laws of Arabic metre and the
  first to write a dictionary. His pupil Sibawaihi (q.v.), a Persian,
  wrote the grammar known simply as _The Book_, which is generally
  regarded in the East as authoritative and almost above criticism.
  Other members of the school of Basra were Abu 'Ubaida (q.v.), Asma'i
  (q.v.), Mubarrad (q.v.) and Ibn Duraid (q.v.). The school of Kufa
  claimed to pay more attention to the living language (spoken among the
  Bedouins) than to written laws of grammar. Among its teachers were
  Kisa'i, the tutor of Harun al-Rashid's sons, Ibn A'rabi, Ibn as-Sikkit
  (d. 857) and Ibn ul-Anbari (885-939). In the fourth century of Islam
  the two schools of Kufa and Basra declined in importance before the
  increasing power of Bagdad, where Ibn Qutaiba, Ibn Jinni (941-1002)
  and others carried on the work, but without the former rivalry of the
  older schools. Persia from the beginning of the 10th century produced
  some outstanding students of Arabic. Hamadhani (d. 932) wrote a book
  of synonyms (ed. L. Cheikho, Beirut, 1885). Jauhari (q.v.) wrote his
  great dictionary the _Sahah_. Tha'alibi (q.v.) and Jurjani (q.v.) were
  almost contemporary, and a little later came Zamakhshari (q.v.), whose
  philological works are almost as famous as his commentary on the
  Koran. The most important dictionaries of Arabic are late in origin.
  The immense work, _Lisan ul Arab_ (ed. 20 vols, Bulaq, 1883-1889), was
  compiled by Ibn Manzur (1232-1311), the _Qamus_ by Fairuzabadi, the
  _Taj ul'Arus_ (ed. 10 vols., Bulaq, 1890), founded on the _Qamus_, by
  Murtada uz-Zabidi (1732-1790).

  _Scientific Literature._--The literature of the various sciences is
  dealt with elsewhere. It is enough here to mention that such existed,
  and that it was not indigenous. It was in the early Abbasid period
  that the scientific works of Greece were translated into Arabic, often
  through the Syriac, and at the same time the influence of Sanskrit
  works made itself felt. Astronomy seems in this way to have come
  chiefly from India. The study of mathematics learned from Greece and
  India was developed by Arabian writers, who in turn became the
  teachers of Europe in the 16th century. Medical literature was
  indebted for its origin to the works of Galen and the medical school
  of Gondesapur. Many of the Arabian philosophers were also physicians
  and wrote on medicine. Chemistry proper was not understood, but
  Arabian writings on alchemy led Europe to it later. So also the
  literature of the animal world (cf. Damiri) is not zoological but
  legendary, and the works on minerals are practical and not scientific.
  See ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY and historical sections of such scientific
  articles as ASTRONOMY, &c.     (G. W. T.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] For the general history of the succeeding period see CALIPHATE;
    EGYPT: _History_, § "Mahommedan."

  [2] For further details of this period, see Egypt: _History_,
    "Mahommedan Period," § 8.

  [3] On the subject of transmission cf. Th. Nöldeke's _Beiträge zur
    Kenntniss der Poesie der alten Araber_ (Hanover, 1804); and W.
    Ahlwardt's _Bemerkungen über die Aechtheit der alten arabischen
    Gedickte_ (Greifswald, 1872).

  [4] For details see the introduction to Nöldeke's translation of
    Tabari's _Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden_
    (Leiden, 1879).

  [5] Published in excerpt by Wüstenfeld along with Azraqi (Leipzig,
    1857-1859).

  [6] Of this work the Gotha Library has a portion containing 290-320
    A.H., of which the part about the West has been printed by Dozy in
    the Bayan, and the rest was published at Leiden in 1897.

  [7] A fragment (198-251 A.H.) is printed in de Goeje, _Fragm. Hist.
    Ar._ (vol. ii., Leiden, 1871).

  [8] The first part was rendered into French by Dubeux in 1836. There
    is an excellent French translation by Zotenberg (1874).

  [9] The chief Arabian geographical works have been edited by M.J. de
    Goeje in his _Bibliotheca Geographorum arabicorum_ (Leiden, 1874
    ff.).