ARABISTAN (formerly KHUZISTAN), a province of Persia, bounded on the S.
by the Persian Gulf, on the W. by Turkish territory, on the N. by
Luristan and on the E. by the Bakhtiari district and Fars. It has its
modern name, signifying "land of the Arabs," from the Arabs who form the
bulk of the population, and is subdivided into the districts of
Muhamrah, Fellahiyeh (the old Dorak), Ram Hormuz (popularly known as
Ramiz), Havizeh, Shushter and Dizful. It has a population of about
200,000 and pays a yearly revenue of about £30,000. The soil is very
fertile, but since the dam over the Karun at Ahvaz was swept away and
the numerous canals which diverted the waters of the river for
irrigation became useless, a great part of the province is uncultivated,
and most of the crops and produce depend for water on rainfall and
wells. The climate is hot, and in the low-lying, swampy districts very
unhealthy; the prevailing winds are north-west and south-east, the
former hot and dry from the arid districts west of Mesopotamia, the
latter bearing much moisture from the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean.
The principal Arab tribes are the Kab (generally known as Chaab) and
Beni Lam, the former mostly settled in towns and villages and by
religion Shi'ites, the latter nomads and Sunnites. The staples of food
are dates and fish in the south, elsewhere the produce of the herds and
flocks and rice, wheat and barley. Other products are maize, cotton,
silk and indigo, and the manufactures include carpets without pile,
coarse woollens, cottons and silk nettings. Dyeing is extensively
carried on in Dizful where most of the indigo is grown.

Khuzistan (meaning "the land of the Khuz") was a part of the Biblical
Elam, the classical Susiana, and appears in the great inscription of
Darius as Uvaja.