ARTHROPODA. The Arachnida form a distinct class or line of descent in
the grade Euarthropoda, diverging (perhaps in common at the start with
the Crustacea) from primitive Euarthropods, which gave rise also to the
separate lines of descent known as the classes Diplopoda, Crustacea,
Chilopoda and Hexapoda.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Entosternum, entosternite or plastron of
_Limulus polyphemus_, Latr. Dorsal surface.

  LAP, Left anterior process.           PLR, Posterior lateral rod or
  RAP, Right anterior process.            tendon.
  PhN, Pharyngeal notch.                PLP, Posterior lateral process.
  ALR, Anterior lateial rod or tendon.  Natural size.

(From Lankester, _Q J. Mic. Sci._, N S vol. xxiv, 1884)]

_Limulus an Arachnid._--Modern views as to the classification and
affinities of the Arachnida have been determined by the demonstration
that _Limulus_ and the extinct Eurypterines (_Pterygotus_, &c.) are
Arachnida; that is to say, are identical in the structure and relation
of so many important parts with _Scorpio_, whilst differing in those
respects from other Arthropoda, that it is impossible to suppose that
the identity is due to homoplasy or convergence, and the conclusion must
be accepted that the resemblances arise from close genetic relationship.
The view that Limulus, the king-crab, is an Arachnid was maintained as
long ago as 1829 by Strauss-Dürckheim (1), on the ground of its
possession of an internal cartilaginous sternum--also possessed by the
Arachnida (see figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6)--and of the similarity of the
disposition of the six leg-like appendages around the mouth in the two
cases (see figs. 45 and 63). The evidence of the exact equivalence of
the segmentation and appendages of Limulus and Scorpio, and of a number
of remarkable points of agreement in structure, was furnished by Ray
Lankester in an article published in 1881 ("Limulus an Arachnid,"
_Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._ vol. xxi. N.S.), and in a series of
subsequent memoirs, in which the structure of the entosternum, of the
coxal glands, of the eyes, of the veno-pericardiac muscles, of the
respiratory lamellae, and of other parts, was for the first time
described, and in which the new facts discovered were shown uniformly to
support the hypothesis that Limulus is an Arachnid. A list of these
memoirs is given at the close of this article (2, 3, 4, 5 and 13). The
Eurypterines (Gigantostraca) were included in the identification,
although at that time they were supposed to possess only five pairs of
anterior or prosomatic appendages. They have now been shown to possess
six pairs (fig. 47), as do Limulus and Scorpio.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Ventral surface of the entosternum of _Limulus
polyphemus_, Latr. Letters as in fig. 1 with the addition of NF, neural
fossa protecting the aggregated ganglia of the central nervous system;
PVP, left posterior ventral process; PMP, posterior median process.
Natural size.

(From Lankester.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Entosternum of scorpion (_Palamnaeus Indus_, de
Geer); dorsal surface.

  asp, Paired anterior process of the sub-neural arch.
  snp, Sub-neural arch.
  ap, Anterior lateral process (same as RAP and LAP in fig. 1).
  lmp, Lateral median process (same as ALR and PLR of fig. 1).
  pp, Posterior process (same as PLP in fig. 1).
  pf, Posterior flap or diaphragm of Newport.
  m^1 and m^2, Perforations of the diaphragm for the passage of
    muscles.
  DR, The paired dorsal ridges.
  GC, Gastric canal or foramen.
  AC, Arterial canal or foramen.

(After Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

The various comparisons previously made between the structure of Limulus
and the Eurypterines on the one hand, and that of a typical Arachnid,
such as Scorpio, on the other, had been vitiated by erroneous notions as
to the origin of the nerves supplying the anterior appendages of Limulus
(which were finally removed by Alphonse Milne-Edwards in his beautiful
memoir (6) on the structure of that animal), and secondly by the
erroneous identification of the double sternal plates of Limulus, called
"chilaria," by Owen, with a pair of appendages (7). Once the identity of
the chilaria with the pentagonal sternal plate of the scorpion is
recognized--an identification first insisted on by Lankester--the whole
series of segments and appendages in the two animals, Limulus and
Scorpio, are seen to correspond most closely, segment for segment, with
one another (see figs. 7 and 8). The structure of the prosomatic
appendages or legs is also seen to present many significant points of
agreement (see figures), but a curious discrepancy existed in the
six-jointed structure of the limb in Limulus, which differed from the
seven-jointed limb of Scorpio by the defect of one joint. R.I. Pocock of
the British Museum has observed that in Limulus a marking exists on the
fourth joint, which apparently indicates a previous division of this
segment into two, and thus establishes the agreement of Limulus and
Scorpio in this small feature of the number of segments in the legs (see
fig. 11).

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Ventral surface of the same entosternum as that
drawn in fig. 3. Letters as in fig. 3 with the addition of NC, neural
canal or foramen.

(After Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  It is not desirable to occupy the limited space of this article by a
  full description of the limbs and segments of Limulus and Scorpio. The
  reader is referred to the complete series of figures here given, with
  their explanatory legends (figs 12, 13, 14, 15). Certain matters,
  however, require comment and explanation to render the comparison
  intelligible. The tergites, or chitinized dorsal halves of the body
  rings, are fused to form a "prosomatic carapace," or carapace of the
  prosoma, in both Limulus and Scorpio (see figs. 7 and 8). This region
  corresponds in both cases to six somites, as indicated by the presence
  of six pairs of limbs. On the surface of the carapace there are in
  both animals a pair of central eyes with simple lens and a pair of
  lateral eye-tracts, which in Limulus consist of closely-aggregated
  simple eyes, forming a "compound" eye, whilst in Scorpio they present
  several separate small eyes. The microscopic structure of the central
  and the lateral eyes has been shown by Lankester and A.G. Bourne (5)
  to differ; but the lateral eyes of Scorpio were shown by them to be
  similar in structure to the lateral eyes of Limulus, and the central
  eyes of Scorpio to be identical in structure with the central eyes of
  Limulus (see below).

  [Illustration: FIG. 5.--Entosternum of one of the mygalomorphous
  spiders; ventral surface. Ph.N., pharyngeal notch. The posterior
  median process with its repetition of triangular segments closely
  resembles the same process in Limulus.

  (From Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 6.--Dorsal surface of the same entosternum as that
  drawn in fig. 5. Ph.N., pharyngeal notch.

  (After Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  Following the prosoma is a region consisting of six segments (figs. 14
  and 15), each carrying a pair of plate-like appendages in both Limulus
  and Scorpio. This region is called the mesosoma. The tergites of this
  region and those of the following region, the metasoma, are fused to
  form a second or posterior carapace in Limulus, whilst remaining free
  in Scorpio. The first pair of foliaceous appendages in each animal is
  the genital operculum; beneath it are found the openings of the
  genital ducts. The second pair of mesosomatic appendages in Scorpio
  are known as the "pectens." Each consists of an axis, bearing numerous
  blunt tooth-like processes arranged in a series. This is represented
  in Limulus by the first gill-bearing appendage. The leaves (some 150
  in number) of the gill-book (see figure) correspond to the tooth-like
  processes of the pectens of Scorpio. The next four pairs of appendages
  (completing the mesosomatic series of six) consist, in both Scorpio
  and Limulus, of a base carrying each 130 to 150 blood-holding,
  leaf-like plates, lying on one another like the leaves of a book.
  Their minute structure is closely similar in the two cases; the
  leaf-like plates receive blood from the great sternal sinus, and serve
  as respiratory organs. The difference between the gill-books of
  Limulus and the lung-books of Scorpio depends on the fact that the
  latter are adapted to aerial respiration, while the former serve for
  aquatic respiration. The appendage carrying the gill-book stands out
  on the surface of the body in Limulus, and has other portions
  developed besides the gill-book and its base; it is fused with its
  fellow of the opposite side. On the other hand, in Scorpio, the
  gill-book-bearing appendage has sunk below the surface, forming a
  recess or chamber for itself, which communicates with the exterior by
  an oval or circular "stigma" (fig. 10, stg). That this in-sinking
  has taken place, and that the lung-books or in-sunken gill-books of
  Scorpio really represent appendages (that is to say, limbs or
  parapodia) is proved by their developmental history (see figs. 17 and
  18). They appear at first as outstanding processes on the surface of
  the body.

  The exact mode in which the in-sinking of superficial outstanding
  limbs, carrying gill-lamellae, has historically taken place has been a
  matter of much speculation. It was to be hoped that the specimen of
  the Silurian scorpion (_Palaeophonus_) from Scotland, showing the
  ventral surface of the mesosoma (fig. 49), would throw light on this
  matter; but the specimen recently carefully studied by the writer and
  Pocock reveals neither gill-bearing limbs nor stigmata. The
  probability appears to be against an actual introversion of the
  appendage and its lamellae, as was at one time suggested by Lankester.
  It is probable that such an in-sinking as is shown in the accompanying
  diagram has taken place (fig. 15); but we are yet in need of evidence
  as to the exact equivalence of margins, axis, &c., obtaining between
  the lung-book of Scorpio and the gill-book of Limulus. Zoologists are
  familiar with many instances (fishes, crustaceans) in which the
  protective walls of a water-breathing organ or gill-apparatus become
  converted into an air-breathing organ or lung, but there is no other
  case known of the conversion of gill processes themselves into
  air-breathing plates.

  [Illustration: FIG. 7.--Diagram of the dorsal surface of _Limulus
  polyphemus_.

    oc, Lateral compound eyes.
    oc', Central monomeniscous eyes.
    PA, Post-anal spine.
    I to VI, The six appendage-bearing somites of the prosoma.
    VII, Usually considered to be the tergum of the genital somite, but
      suggested by Pocock to be that of the otherwise suppressed
      praegenital somite.
    VIII to XIII, The six somites of the mesosoma, each with a movable
      pleural spine and a pair of dorsal entopophysis or muscle-attaching
      ingrowths.
    XIV to XVIII, The confluent or unexpressed six somites of the
      metasoma.

    [According to the system of numbering explained in the text, if VII
    is the tergum of the praegenital somite (as is probable) it should
    be labelled _Prg_ without any number, and the somites VIII to XIII
    should be lettered 1 to 6, indicating that they are the six normal
    somites of the mesosoma; whilst XV to XVIII should be replaced by
    the numbers 7 to 12--an additional suppressed segment (making up the
    typical six) being reckoned to the metasomatic fusion.]

  (From Lankester, _Q J. Micr Set_. vol. xxi., 1881)]

  The identification of the lung-books of Scorpio with the gill-books of
  Limulus is practically settled by the existence of the pectens in
  Scorpio (fig. 14, VIII) on the second mesosomatic somite. There is no
  doubt that _these_ are parapodial or limb appendages, carrying
  numerous imbricated secondary processes, and therefore comparable in
  essential structure to the leaf-bearing plates of the second
  mesosomatic somite of Limulus. They have remained unenclosed and
  projecting on the surface of the body, as once were the appendages of
  the four following somites. But they have lost their respiratory
  function. In non-aquatic life such an unprotected organ cannot
  subserve respiration. The "pectens" have become more firmly chitinized
  and probably somewhat altered in shape as compared with their
  condition in the aquatic ancestral scorpions. Their present function
  in scorpions is not ascertained. They are not specially sensitive
  under ordinary conditions, and may be touched or even pinched without
  causing any discomfort to the scorpion. It is probable that they
  acquire special sensibility at the breeding season and serve as
  "guides" in copulation. The shape of the legs and the absence of
  paired terminal claws in the Silurian _Palaeophonus_ (see figs. 48 and
  49) as compared with living scorpions (see fig. 10) show that the
  early scorpions were aquatic, and we may hope some day in
  better-preserved specimens than the two as yet discovered, to find the
  respiratory organs of those creatures in the condition of projecting
  appendages serving aquatic respiration somewhat as in Limulus, though
  not necessarily repeating the exact form of the broad plates of
  Limulus.

  [Illustration: FIG. 8.--Diagram of the dorsal surface of a scorpion to
  compare with fig. 7. Letters and Roman numerals as in fig. 7,
  excepting that VII is here certainly the tergum of the first somite of
  the mesosoma--the genital somite--and is _not_ a survival of the
  embryonic praegenital somite. The anus (not seen) is on the sternal
  surface.

  (From Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  It is important to note that the series of lamellae of the lung-book
  and the gill-book correspond _exactly_ in structure, the narrow, flat
  blood-space in the lamellae being interrupted by pillar-like junctions
  of the two surfaces in both cases (see Lankester (4)), and the free
  surfaces of the adjacent lamellae being covered with a very delicate
  chitinous cuticle which is drawn out into delicate hairs and
  processes. The elongated axis which opens at the stigma in Scorpio and
  which can be cleared of soft, surrounding tissues and coagulated blood
  so as to present the appearance of a limb axis carrying the book-like
  leaves of the lung is not really, as it would seem to be at first
  sight, the limb axis. That is necessarily a blood-holding structure
  and is obliterated and fused with soft tissues of the sternal region
  so that the lamellae cannot be detached and presented as standing out
  from it. The apparent axis or basal support of the scorpion's
  lung-books shown in the figures, is a false or secondary axis and
  merely a part of the infolded surface which forms the air-chamber. The
  maceration of the soft parts of a scorpion preserved in weak spirit
  and the cleaning of the chitinized in-grown cuticle give rise to the
  false appearance of a limb axis carrying the lamellae. The margins of
  the lamellae of the scorpion's lung-book, which are _lowermost_ in the
  figures (fig. 15) and appear to be free, are really those which are
  attached to the blood-holding axis. The true free ends are those
  nearest the stigma.

  Passing on now from the mesosoma we come in Scorpio to the metasoma of
  six segments, the first of which is broad whilst the rest are
  cylindrical. The last is perforated by the anus and carries the
  post-anal spine or sting. The somites of the metasoma carry no
  parapodia. In Limulus the metasoma is practically suppressed. In the
  allied extinct Eurypterines it is well developed, and resembles that
  of Scorpio. In the embryo Limulus (fig. 42) the six somites of the
  mesosoma are not fused to form a carapace at an early stage, and they
  are followed by three separately marked metasomatic somites; the other
  three somites of the metasoma have disappeared in Limulus, but are
  represented by the unsegmented prae-anal region. It is probable that
  we have in the metasoma of Limulus a case of the disappearance of once
  clearly demarcated somites. It would be possible to suppose, on the
  other hand, that new somites are only beginning to make their
  appearance here. The balance of various considerations is against the
  latter hypothesis. Following the metasoma in Limulus, we have as in
  Scorpio the post-anal spine--in this case not a sting, but a powerful
  and important organ of locomotion, serving to turn the animal over
  when it has fallen upon its back. The nature of the post-anal spine
  has been strangely misinterpreted by some writers. Owen (7) maintained
  that it represented a number of coalesced somites, regardless of its
  post-anal position and mode of development. The agreement of the
  grouping of the somites, of the form of the parapodia (appendages,
  limbs) in each region, of the position of the genital aperture and
  operculum, of the position and character of the eyes, and of the
  powerful post-anal spines not seen in other Arthropods, is very
  convincing as to the affinity of Limulus and Scorpio. Perhaps the
  most important general agreement of Scorpio compared with Limulus and
  the Eurypterines is the division of the body into the three regions
  (or tagmata)--prosoma, mesosoma and metasoma--each consisting of six
  segments, the prosoma having leg-like appendages, the mesosoma having
  foliaceous appendages, and the metasoma being destitute of appendages.

  [Illustration: FIG. 9.--Ventral view of the posterior carapace or
  meso-metasomatic (opisthospmatic) fusion of _Limulus polyphemus_. The
  soft integument and limbs of the mesosoma have been removed as well as
  all the viscera and muscles, so that the inner surface of the terga of
  these somites with their entopophyses are seen. The unsegmented dense
  chitinous sternal plate of the metasoma (XIII to XVIII) is not
  removed. Letters as in fig. 7.

  (After Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  In 1893, some years after the identification of the somites of Limulus
  with those of Scorpio, thus indicated, had been published, zoologists
  were startled by the discovery by a Japanese zoologist, Kishinouye
  (8), of a seventh prosomatic somite in the embryo of Limulus
  longispina. This was seen in longitudinal sections, as shown in fig.
  19. The simple identification of somite with somite in Limulus and
  Scorpio seemed to be threatened by this discovery. But in 1896 Dr
  August Brauer of Marburg (9) discovered in the embryo of Scorpio a
  seventh prosomatic somite (see VII PrG, figs. 17 and 18), or, if we
  please so to term it, a _praegenital_ somite, hitherto unrecognized.
  In the case of Scorpio this segment is indicated in the embryo by the
  presence of a pair of rudimentary appendages, carried by a well-marked
  somite. As in Limulus, so in Scorpio, this unexpected somite and its
  appendages disappear in the course of development. In fact, more or
  less complete "excalation" of the somite takes place. Owing to its
  position it is convenient to term the somite which is excalated in
  Limulus and Scorpio "the praegenital somite." It appears not
  improbable that the sternal plates wedged in between the last pair of
  legs in both Scorpio and Limulus, viz. the pentagonal sternite of
  Scorpio (fig. 10) and the chilaria of Limulus (see figs. 13 and 20),
  may in part represent in the adult the sternum of the excalated
  praegenital somite. This has not been demonstrated by an actual
  following out of the development, but the position of these pieces and
  the fact that they are (in Limulus) supplied by an independent
  segmental nerve, favours the view that they may comprise the sternal
  area of the vanished praegenital somite. This interpretation, however,
  of the "metasternites" of Limulus and Scorpio is opposed by the
  coexistence in Thelyphonus (figs. 55, 57 and 58) of a similar
  metasternite with a complete praegenital somite. H.J. Hansen (10) has
  recognized that the "praegenital somite" persists in a rudimentary
  condition, forming a "waist" to the series of somites in the Pedipalpi
  and Araneae. The present writer is of opinion that it will be found
  most convenient to treat this evanescent somite as something special,
  and not to attempt to reckon it to either the prosoma or the mesosoma.
  These will then remain as typically composed each of six
  appendage-bearing somites-the prosoma comprising in addition the
  ocular prosthomere.[1] When the praegenital somite or traces of it are
  present it should not be called "the seventh prosomatic" or the "first
  mesosomatic," but simply the "praegenital somite." The first segment
  of the mesosoma of Scorpio and Limulus thus remains the first segment,
  and can be identified as such throughout the Eu-arachnida, carrying as
  it always does the genital apertures. But it is necessary to remember,
  in the light of recent discoveries, that the sixth prosomatic pair of
  appendages is carried on the seventh somite of the whole series, there
  being two prosthomeres or somites in front of the mouth, the first
  carrying the eyes, the second the chelicerae; also that the first
  mesosomatic or genital somite is not the seventh or even the eighth of
  the whole senes of somites which have been historically present, but
  is the ninth, owing to the presence or to the excalation of a
  praegenital somite. It seems that confusion and trouble will be best
  avoided by abstaining from the introduction of the non-evident
  somites, the ocular and the praegenital, into the numerical
  nomenclature of the component somites of the three great body regions.
  We shall, therefore, ignoring the ocular somite, speak of the first,
  second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth leg-bearing somites of the
  prosoma, and indicate the appendages by the Roman numerals, I, II,
  III, IV, V, VI, and whilst ignoring the praegenital somite we shall
  speak of the first, second, third, &c., somite of the mesosoma or
  opisthosoma (united mesosoma and metasoma) and indicate them by the
  Arabic numerals.

  [Illustration: FIG. 10.--Ventral view of a scorpion, _Palamnaeus
  indus_, de Geer, to show the arrangement of the coxae of the limbs,
  the sternal elements, genital plate and pectens.

    M, Mouth behind the oval median camerostome.
    I, The chelicerae.
    II, The chelae.
    III to VI, the four pairs of walking legs.
    VIIgo, The genital somite or first somite of the mesosoma with the
      genital operculum (a fused pair of limbs).
    VIIIp, The pectiniferous somite.
    IXstg to XIIstg, the four pulmonary somites.
    met, The pentagonal metasternite of the prosoma behind all the
      coxae.
    x, The sternum of the pectiniferous somite.
    y, The broad first somite of the metasoma.]

  There are a number of other important points of structure besides
  those referring to the somites and appendages in which Limulus agrees
  with Scorpio or other Arachnida and differs from other Arthropoda. The
  chief of these are as follows:--

  [Illustration: FIG. 11.--Third leg of _Limulus polyphemus_, showing
  the division of the fourth segment of the leg by a groove S into two,
  thus giving seven segments to the leg as in scorpion.

  (From a drawing by Pocock.)]

  1. _The Composition of the Head_ (that is to say, of the anterior part
  of the prosoma) _with especial Reference to the Region in Front of the
  Mouth._--It appears (see ARTHROPODA) that there is embryological
  evidence of the existence of two somites in Arachnida which were
  originally post-oral, but have become prae-oral by adaptational
  shifting of the oral aperture. These forwardly-slipped somites are
  called "prosthomeres." The first of these has, in Arachnids as in
  other Arthropods, its pair of appendages represented by the eyes. The
  second has for its pair of appendages the small pair of limbs which in
  all living Arachnids is either chelate or retrovert (as in spiders),
  and is known as the chelicerae. It is possible, as maintained by some
  writers (Patten and others), that the lobes of the cerebral nervous
  mass in Arachnids indicate a larger number of prosthomeres as having
  fused in this region, but there is no _embryological_ evidence at
  present which justifies us in assuming the existence in Arachnids of
  more than two prosthomeres. The position of the chelicerae of Limulus
  and of the ganglionic nerve-masses from which they receive their
  nerve-supply, is closely similar to that of the same structures in
  Scorpio. The cerebral mass is in Limulus more easily separated by
  dissection as a median lobe distinct from the laterally-placed ganglia
  of the chelceral somite than is the case in Scorpio, but the relations
  are practically the same in the two forms. Formerly it was supposed
  that in Limulus both the chelicerae and the next following pair of
  appendages were prosthomerous, as in Crustacea, but the dissections of
  Alphonse Milne-Edwards (6) demonstrated the true limitations of the
  cerebrum, whilst embryological researches have done as much for
  Scorpio. Limulus thus agrees with Scorpio and differs from the
  Crustacea, in which there are three prosthomeres--one ocular and two
  carrying palpiform appendages. It is true that in the lower Crustacea
  (Apus, &c.) we have evidence of the gradual movement forward of the
  nerve-ganglia belonging to these palpiform appendages. But although in
  such lower Crustacea the nerve-ganglia of the third prosthomere have
  not fused with the anterior nerve-mass, there is no question as to the
  prae-oral position of two appendage-bearing somites in addition to the
  ocular prosthomere. The Crustacea have, in fact, three prosthomeres in
  the head and the Arachnida only two, and Limulus agrees with the
  Arachnida in this respect and differs from the Crustacea. The central
  nervous systems of Limulus and of Scorpio present closer agreement in
  structure than can be found when a Crustacean is compared with either.
  The wide divarication of the lateral cords in the prosoma and their
  connexion by transverse commissures, together with the "attraction" of
  ganglia to the prosomatic ganglion group which properly belong to
  hinder segments, are very nearly identical in the two animals. The
  form and disposition of the ganglion cells are also peculiar and
  closely similar in the two. (See Patten (42) for important
  observations on the neuromeres, &c., of Limulus and Scorpio.)

  [Illustration: FIG. 12.--The prosomatic appendages of _Limulus
  polyphemus_ (right) and Scorpio (left), _Palamnaeus indus_ compared.
  The corresponding appendages are marked with the same Roman numeral.
  The Arabic numerals indicate the segments of the legs.

    cox, Coxa or basal segment of the leg.
    stc, The sterno-coxal process or jaw-like up-growth of the coxa.
    epc, The articulated movable outgrowth of the coxa, called the
      epi-coxite (present only in III of the scorpion and III, IV and V
      of Limulus).
    ex^1, The exopodite of the sixth limb of Limulus.
    a, b, c, d, Movable processes on the same leg (see for some
      suggestions on the morphology of this leg, Pocock in _Quart. Journ.
      Micr. Sci._ March 1901; see also fig. 50 below and explanation).

  (From Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 13.--Diagrams of the metasternite st, with genital
  operculum op, and the first lamelligerous pair of appendages ga, with
  uniting sternal element st of Scorpio (left) and Limulus (right).

  (From Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  2. _The Minute Structure of the Central Eyes and of the Lateral
  Eyes._--Limulus agrees with Scorpio not only in having a pair of
  central eyes and also lateral eyes, but in the microscopic structure
  of those organs, which differs in the central and lateral eyes
  respectively. The central eyes are "simple eyes," that is to say, have
  a single lens, and are hence called "monomeniscous." The lateral eyes
  are in Limulus "compound eyes," that is to say, consist of many lenses
  placed close together; beneath each lens is a complex of protoplasmic
  cells, in which the optic nerve terminates. Each such unit is termed
  an "ommatidium." The lateral eyes of Scorpio consist of groups of
  separate small lenses each with its ommatidium, but they do not form a
  continuous compound eye as in Limulus. The ommatidium (soft structure
  beneath the lens-unit of a compound eye) is very simple in both
  Scorpio and Limulus. It consists of a single layer of cells,
  continuous with those which secrete the general chitinous covering of
  the prosoma. The cells of the ommatidium are a good deal larger than
  the neighbouring common cells of the epidermis. They secrete the
  knob-like lens (fig. 22). But they also receive the nerve fibres of
  the optic nerve. They are at the same time both optic nerve-end cells,
  that is to say, retina cells, and corneagen cells or secretors of the
  chitinous lens-like cornea. In Limulus (fig. 23) each ommatidium has a
  peculiar ganglion cell developed in a central position, whilst the
  ommatidium of the lateral eyelets of Scorpio shows small intermediate
  cells between the larger nerve-end cells. The structure of the lateral
  eye of Limulus was first described by Grenacher, and further and more
  accurately by Lankester and Bourne (5) and by Watase; that of Scorpio
  by Lankester and Bourne, who showed that the statements of von Graber
  were erroneous, and that the lateral eyes of Scorpio have a single
  cell-layered or "monostichous" ommatidium like that of Limulus. Watase
  has shown, in a very convincing way, how by deepening the pit-like set
  of cells beneath a simple lens the more complex ommatidia of the
  compound eyes of Crustacea and Hexapoda may be derived from such a
  condition as that presented in the lateral eyes of Limulus and
  Scorpio. (For details the reader is referred to Watase (11) and to
  Lankester and Bourne (5).) The structure of the central eyes of
  Scorpio and spiders and also of Limulus differs essentially from that
  of the lateral eyes in having two layers of cells (hence called
  diplostichous) beneath the lens, separated from one another by a
  membrane (figs. 24 and 25). The upper layer is the corneagen and
  secretes the lens, the lower is the retinal layer. The mass of soft
  cell-structures beneath a large lens of a central eye is called an
  "ommatoeum." It shows in Scorpio and Limulus a tendency to segregate
  into minor groups or "ommatidia." It is found that in embryological
  growth the retinal layer of the central eyes forms as a separate
  pouch, which is pushed in laterally beneath the corneagen layer from
  the epidermic cell layer. Hence it is in origin double, and consists
  of a true retinal layer and a post-retinal layer (fig. 24, B), though
  these are not separated by a membrane. Accordingly the diplostichous
  ommatoeum or soft tissue of the Arachnid's central eye should strictly
  be called "triplostichous," since the deep layer is itself doubled or
  folded. The retinal cells of both the lateral and central eyes of
  Limulus and Scorpio produce cuticular structures on their sides; each
  such piece is a rhabdomere and a number (five or ten) uniting form a
  rhabdom (fig. 26). In the specialized ommatidia of the compound eyes
  of Crustacea and Hexapods the rhabdom is an important structure.[2] It
  is a very significant fact that the lateral and central eyes of
  Limulus and Scorpio not only agree each with each in regard to their
  monostichous and diplostichous structure, but also in the formation in
  both classes of eyes of rhabdomeres and rhabdoms in which the
  component pieces are five or a multiple of five (fig. 26). Whilst each
  unit of the lateral eye of Limulus has a rhabdom of ten[3] pieces
  forming a star-like chitinous centre in section, each lateral eye of
  Scorpio has several rhabdoms of five or less rhabdomeres, indicating
  that the Limulus lateral eye-unit is more specialized than the
  detached lateral eyelet of Scorpio, so as to present a coincidence of
  one lens with one rhabdom. Numerous rhabdomeres (grouped as rhabdoms
  in Limulus) are found in the retinal layer of the central eyes also.

  [Illustration: FIG. 14.--The first three pairs of mesosomatic
  appendages of Scorpio and Limulus compared.

    VII, The genital operculum.
    VIII, The pectens of Scorpio and the first branchial plate of
      Limulus.
    IX, The first pair of lung-books of Scorpio and the second branchial
      plate of Limulus.
    gp, Genital pore.
    epst, Epistigmatic sclerite.
    stg, Stigma or orifice of the hollow tendons of the branchial plates
      of Limulus.

  (After Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  Whilst Limulus agrees thus closely with Scorpio in regard to the eyes,
  it is to be noted that no Crustacean has structures corresponding to
  the peculiar diplostichous central eyes, though these occur again
  (with differences in detail) in _Hexapoda_. Possibly, however, an
  investigation of the development of the median eyes of some Crustacea
  (Apus, Palaemon) may prove them to be diplostichous in origin.

  3. _The so-called_ "_Coxal Glands_."--In 1882 (_Proc. Roy. Soc_. No.
  221) Lankester described under the name "coxal glands" a pair of
  brilliantly white oviform bodies lying in the Scorpion's prosoma
  immediately above the coxae of the fifth and sixth pairs of legs (fig.
  27). These bodies had been erroneously supposed by Newport (12) and
  other observers to be glandular outgrowths of the alimentary canal.
  They are really excretory glands, and communicate with the exterior by
  a very minute aperture on the posterior face of the coxa of the fifth
  limb on each side. When examined with the microscope, by means of the
  usual section method, they are seen to consist of a labyrinthine tube
  lined with peculiar cells, each cell having a deep vertically striated
  border on the surface farthest from the lumen, as is seen in the cells
  of some renal organs. The coils and branches of the tube are packed by
  connective tissue and blood spaces. A similar pair of coxal glands,
  lobate instead of ovoid in shape, was described by Lankester in
  Mygale, and it was also shown by him that the structures in Limulus
  called "brick-red glands" by Packard have the same structure and
  position as the coxal glands of Scorpio and Mygale. In Limulus these
  organs consist each of four horizontal lobes lying on the coxal margin
  of the second, third, fourth, and fifth prosomatic limbs, the four
  lobes being connected to one another by a transverse piece or stem
  (fig. 28). Microscopically their structure is the same in essentials
  as that of the coxal glands of Scorpio (13). Coxal glands have since
  been recognized and described in other Arachnida. In 1900 it was shown
  that the coxal gland of Limulus is provided with a very delicate
  thin-walled coiled duct which opens, even in the adult condition, by a
  minute pore on the coxa of the fifth leg (Patten and Hazen, 13A).
  Previously to this, Lankester's pupil Gulland had shown (1885) that in
  the embryo the coxal gland is a comparatively simple tube, which opens
  to the exterior in this position and by its other extremity into a
  coelomic space. Similar observations were made by Laurie (17) in
  Lankester's laboratory (1890) with regard to the early condition of
  the coxal gland of Scorpio, and by Bertkau (41) as to that of the
  spider Atypus. H.M. Bernard (13B) showed that the opening remains in
  the adult scorpion. In all the embryonic or permanent opening is on
  the coxa of the fifth pair of prosomatic limbs. Thus an organ newly
  discovered in Scorpio was found to have its counterpart in Limulus.

  The name "coxal gland" needs to be carefully distinguished from
  "crural gland," with which it is apt to be confused. The crural
  glands, which occur in many terrestrial Arthropods, are epidermal in
  origin and totally distinct from the coxal glands. The coxal glands of
  the Arachnida are structures of the same nature as the green glands of
  the higher Crustacea and the so-called "shell glands" of the
  Entomostraca. The latter open at the base of the fifth pair of limbs
  of the Crustacean, just as the coxal glands open on the coxal joint of
  the fifth pair of limbs of the Arachnid. Both belong to the category
  of "coelomoducts," namely, tubular or funnel-like portions of the
  coelom opening to the exterior in pairs in each somite (potentially,)
  and usually persisting in only a few somites as either "urocoels"
  (renal organs) or "gonocoets" (genital tubes). In Peripatus they occur
  in every somite of the body. They have till recently been very
  generally identified with the nephridia of Chaetopod worms, but there
  is good reason for considering the true nephridia (typified by the
  nephridia of the earthworm) as a distinct class of organs (see
  Lankester in vol. ii. chap. in. of _A Treatise on Zoology_, 1900). The
  genital ducts of Arthropoda are, like the green glands, shell glands
  and coxal glands, to be regarded as coelomoducts (gonocoels). The
  coxal glands do not establish any special connexion between Limulus
  and Scorpio, since they also occur in the same somite in the lower
  Crustacea, but it is to be noted that the coxal glands of Limulus are
  in minute structure and probably in function more like those of
  Arachnids than those of Crustacea.

  [Illustration: FIG. 15.--The remaining three pairs of mesosomatic
  appendages of Scorpio and Limulus. Letters as in fig. 14. l130
  indicates that there are 130 lamellae in the scorpion's lung-book,
  whilst l150 indicates that 150 similar lamellae are counted in the
  gill of Limulus.

  (After Lankester, _loc. cit._)]

  4. _The Entosternites and their Minute Structure._--Strauss-Dürckheim
  (1) was the first to insist on the affinity between Limulus and the
  Arachnids, indicated by the presence of a free suspended entosternum
  or plastron or entosternite in both. We have figured here (figs. 1 to
  6) the entosternites of Limulus, Scorpio and Mygale. Lankester some
  years ago made a special study of the histology (3) of these
  entosternites for the purpose of comparison, and also ascertained the
  relations of the very numerous muscles which are inserted into them
  (4). The entosternites are cartilaginous in texture, but they have
  neither the chemical character nor the microscopic structure of the
  hyaline cartilage of Vertebrates. They yield chitin in place of
  chondrin or gelatin--as does also the cartilage of the Cephalopod's
  endoskeleton. In microscopic structure they all present the closest
  agreement with one another. We find a firm, homogeneous or sparsely
  fibrillated matrix in which are embedded nucleated cells (corpuscles
  of protoplasm) arranged in rows of three, six or eight, parallel with
  the adjacent lines of fibrillation.

  [Illustration: FIG. 16.--Diagram to show the way in which an
  outgrowing gill-process bearing blood-holding lamellae, may give rise,
  if the sternal body wall sinks inwards, to a lung-chamber with
  air-holding lamellae.

    I is the embryonic condition.
    bs, Blood sinus.
    L is the condition of outgrowth with gl, gill lamellae.
    A is the condition of in-sinking of the sternal surface and
      consequent enclosure of the lamelligerous surface of the appendage
      in a chamber with narrow orifice--the pulmonary air-holding
      chamber.
    pl, Pulmonary lamellae.
    bs, Blood sinus.

  (After Kingsley.)]

  A minute entosternite having the above-described structure is found in
  the Crustacean Apus between the bases of the mandibles, and also in
  the Decapoda in a similar position, but in no Crustacean does it
  attain to any size or importance. On the other hand, the entosternite
  of the Arachnida is a very large and important feature in the
  structure of the prosoma, and must play an important part in the
  economy of these organisms. In Limulus (figs. 1 and 2) it has as many
  as twenty-five pairs of muscles attached to it, coming to it from the
  bases of the surrounding limbs and from the dorsal carapace and from
  the pharynx. It consists of an oblong plate 2 in. in length and 1 in
  breadth, with a pair of tendinous outgrowths standing out from it at
  right angles on each side. It "floats" between the prosomatic nerve
  centres and the alimentary canal. In each somite of the mesosoma is a
  small, free entosternite having a similar position, but below or
  ventral to the nerve cords, and having a smaller number of muscles
  attached to it. The entosternite was probably in origin part of the
  fibrous connective tissue lying close to the integument of the sternal
  surface--giving attachment to muscles corresponding more or less to
  those at present attached to it. It became isolated and detached, why
  or with what advantage to the organism it is difficult to say, and at
  that period of Arachnidan development the great ventral nerve cords
  occupied a more lateral position than they do at present. We know that
  such a lateral position of the nerve cords preceded the median
  position in both Arthropoda and Chaetopoda. Subsequently to the
  floating off of the entosternite the approximation of the nerve cords
  took place in the prosoma, and thus they were able to take up a
  position below the entosternite. In the mesosoma the approximation had
  occurred before the entosternites were formed.

  [Illustration: FIG. 17.--Embryo of scorpion, ventral view showing
  somites and appendages.

    sgc, Frontal groove.
    sa, Rudiment of lateral eyes.
    obl, Camerostome (upper lip).
    so, Sense-organ of Patten.
    PrGabp^1, Rudiment of the appendage of the praegenital somite which
      disappears.
    abp^2, Rudiment of the right half of the genital operculum.
    abp^3, Rudiment of the right pecten.
    abp^4 to abp^7. Rudiments of the four appendages which carry the
      pulmonary lamellae.
    I to VI, Rudiments of the six limbs of the prosoma.
    VIIPrG, The evanescent praegenital somite.
    VIII, The first mesosomatic somite or genital somite.
    IX, The second mesosomatic somite or pectiniferous somite.
    X to XIII, The four pulmoniferous somites.
    XIV, The first metasomatic somite.

  (After Brauer, _Zeitsch. wiss. Zool_., vol. lix., 1895.)]

  In the scorpion (figs. 3 and 4) the entosternite has tough
  membrane-like outgrowths which connect it with the body-wall, both
  dorsally and ventrally forming an oblique diaphragm, cutting off the
  cavity of the prosoma from that of the mesosoma. It was described by
  Newport as "the diaphragm." Only the central and horizontal parts of
  this structure correspond precisely to the entosternite of Limulus:
  the right and left anterior processes (marked ap in figs. 3 and 4, and
  RAP, LAP, in figs. 1 and 2) correspond in the two animals, and the
  median lateral process _lmp_ of the scorpion represents the tendinous
  outgrowths ALR, PLR of Limulus. The scorpion's entosternite gives rise
  to outgrowths, besides the great posterior flaps, pf, which form the
  diaphragm, unrepresented in Limulus. These are a ventral arch forming
  a neural canal through which the great nerve cords pass (figs. 3 and
  4, _snp_), and further a dorsal gastric canal and arterial canal which
  transmit the alimentary tract and the dorsal artery respectively
  (figs. 3 and 4, GC, DR).

  [Illustration: FIG. 18.--Portion of a similar embryo at a later stage
  of growth. The praegenital somite, VII PrG, is still present, but has
  lost its rudimentary appendages; go, the genital operculum, left half;
  Km, the left pecten; abp^4 to abp^7, the rudimentary appendages of
  the lung-sacs.

  (After Brauer, _loc. cit_.)]

  In Limulus small entosternites are found in each somite of the
  appendage-bearing mesosoma, and we find in Scorpio, in the only somite
  of the mesosoma which has a well-developed pair of appendages, that of
  the pectens, a small entosternite with ten pairs of muscles inserted
  into it. The supra-pectinal entosternite lies ventral to the nerve
  cords.

  In Mygale (figs. 5 and 6) the form of the entosternite is more like
  that of Limulus than is that of Scorpio. The anterior notch Ph.N. is
  similar to that in Limulus, whilst the imbricate triangular pieces of
  the posterior median region resemble the similarly-placed structures
  of Limulus in a striking manner.

  [Illustration: FIG. 19.--Section through an early embryo of _Limulus
  longispina_, showing seven transverse divisions in the region of the
  unsegmented anterior carapace. The seventh, VII, is anterior to the
  genital operculum, op, and is the cavity of the praegenital somite
  which is more or less completely suppressed in subsequent development,
  possibly indicated by the area marked VII in fig. 7 and by the great
  entopophyses of the prosomatic carapace.

  (After Kishinouye, _Journ. Sci. Coll. Japan_, vol. v., 1892.)]

  It must be confessed that we are singularly ignorant as to the
  functional significance of these remarkable organs--the entosternites.
  Their movement in an upward or downward direction in Limulus and
  Mygale must exert a pumping action on the blood contained in the
  dorsal arteries and the ventral veins respectively. In Scorpio the
  completion of the horizontal plate by oblique naps, so as to form an
  actual diaphragm shutting off the cavity of the prosoma from the rest
  of the body, possibly gives to the organs contained in the anterior
  chamber a physiological advantage in respect of the supply of arterial
  blood and its separation from the venous blood of the mesosoma.
  Possibly the movement of the diaphragm may determine the passage of
  air into or out of the lung-sacs. Muscular fibres connected with the
  suctorial pharynx are in Limulus inserted into the entosternite, and
  the activity of the two organs may be correlated.

  5. _The Blood and the Blood-vascular System._--The blood fluids of
  Limulus and Scorpio are very similar. Not only are the blood
  corpuscles of Limulus more like in form and granulation to those of
  Scorpio than to those of any Crustacean, but the fluid is in both
  animals strongly impregnated with the blue-coloured respiratory
  proteid, haemocyanin. This body occurs also in the blood of Crustacea
  and of Molluscs, but its abundance in both Limulus and Scorpio is very
  marked, and gives to the freshly-shed blood a strong indigo-blue tint.

  [Illustration: FIG. 20.--View of the ventral surface of the mid-line
  of the prosomatic region of _Limulus polyphemus_. The coxae of the
  five pairs of limbs following the chelicerae were arranged in a series
  on each side between the mouth, M, and the metasternites, mets.

    sf, The sub-frontal median sclerite.
    Ch, The chelicerae.
    cam, The camerostome or upper lip.
    M, The mouth.
    pmst, The promesosternal sclerite of chitinous plate, unpaired.
    mets, The right and left metasternites (corresponding to the
      similarly placed pentagonal sternite of Scorpio). Natural size.

  (After Lankester.)]

  The great dorsal contractile vessel or "heart" of Limulus is closely
  similar to that of Scorpio; its ostia or incurrent orifices are placed
  in the same somites as those of Scorpio, but there is one additional
  posterior pair. The origin of the paired arteries from the heart
  differs in Limulus from the arrangement obtaining in Scorpio, in that
  a pair of lateral commissural arteries exist in Limulus (as described
  by Alphonse Milne-Edwards (6)) leading to a suppression of the more
  primitive direct connexion of the four pairs of posterior lateral
  arteries and of the great median posterior arteries with the heart
  itself (fig. 29). The arterial system is very completely developed in
  both Limulus and Scorpio, branching repeatedly until minute arterioles
  are formed, not to be distinguished from true capillaries; these open
  into irregular swollen vessels which are the veins or venous sinuses.
  A very remarkable feature in Limulus, first described by Owen, is the
  close accompaniment of the prosomatic nerve centres and nerves by
  arteries, so close indeed that the great ganglion mass and its
  out-running nerves are actually sunk in or invested by arteries. The
  connexion is not so intimate in Scorpio, but is nevertheless a very
  close one, closer than we find in any other Arthropods in which the
  arterial system is well developed, e.g. the Myriapoda and some of the
  arthrostracous Crustacea. It seems that there is a primitive tendency
  in the Arthropoda for the arteries to accompany the nerve cords, and a
  "supra-spinal" artery--that is to say, an artery in close relation to
  the ventral nerve cords--has been described in several cases. On the
  other hand, in many Arthropods, especially those which possess
  tracheae, the arteries do not have a long course, but soon open into
  wide blood sinuses. Scorpio certainly comes nearer to Limulus in the
  high development of its arterial system, and the intimate relation of
  the anterior aorta and its branches to the nerve centres and great
  nerves, than does any other Arthropod.

  [Illustration: FIG. 2l.--Development of the lateral eyes of a
  scorpion. h, Epidermic cell-layer; _mes_, mesoblastic connective
  tissue; n, nerves; II, III, IV, V, depressions of the epidermis in
  each of which a cuticular lens will be formed.

  (_From Korschelt and Heider, after Laurie_.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 22.--Section through the lateral eye of
  _Euscorpius italicus_.

    lens, Cuticular lens.
    nerv c, Retinal cells (nerve-end cells).
    rhabd, Rhabdomes.
    nerv f, Nerve fibres of the optic nerve.
    int, Intermediate cells (lying between the bases of the retinal
      cells).

  (After Lankester and Bourne from Parker and Habwell's _Text book of
  Zoology_, Macmillan & Co.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 23.--Section through a portion of the lateral eye
  of Limulus, showing three ommatidia--A, B and C. hyp, The epidermic
  cell-layer (so-called hypodermis), the cells of which increase in
  volume below each lens, l, and become nerve-end cells or
  retinula-cells, rt; in A, the letters rh point to a rhabdomere
  secreted by the cell rt; c, the peculiar central spherical cell; n,
  nerve fibres; mes, mesoblastic skeletal tissue; ch, chitinous
  cuticle.

  (From Korschelt and Heider after Watase.)]

  An arrangement of great functional importance in regard to the venous
  system must now be described, which was shown in 1883 by Lankester to
  be common to Limulus and Scorpio. This arrangement has not hitherto
  been detected in any other class than the Arachnida, and if it should
  ultimately prove to be peculiar to that group, would have considerable
  weight as a proof of the close genetic affinity of Limulus and
  Scorpio.

  [Illustration: FIG. 24.--Diagrams of the development and adult
  structure of one of the paired central eyes of a scorpion.

    A, Early condition before the lens is deposited, showing the folding
      of the epidermic cell-layer into three.
    B, Diagram showing the nature of this infolding.
    C, Section through the fully formed eye.
    h, Epidermic cell-layer.
    r, The retinal portion of the same which, owing to the infolding,
      lies between gl, the corneagen or lens-forming portion, and pr, the
      post-retinal or capsular portion or fold.
    l, Cuticular lens.
    g, Line separating lens from the lens-forming or corneagen cells of
      the epidermis.
    n, Nerve fibres.
    rh, Rhabdomeres.

    [How the inversion of the nerve-end-cells and their connexion with
    the nerve-fibres is to be reconciled with the condition found in the
    adult, or with that of the monostichous eye, has not hitherto been
    explained.]

  (From Korschelt and Heider.)]

  The great pericardial sinus is strongly developed in both animals. Its
  walls are fibrous and complete, and it holds a considerable volume of
  blood when the heart itself is contracted. Opening in pairs in each
  somite, right and left into the pericardial sinus are large veins,
  which bring the blood respectively from the gill-books and the
  lung-books to that chamber, whence it passes by the ostia into the
  heart. The blood is brought to the respiratory organs in both cases by
  a great venous collecting sinus having a ventral median position. In
  both animals _the wall of the pericardial sinus is connected by
  vertical muscular bands to the wall of the ventral venous sinus_ (its
  lateral expansions around the lung-books in Scorpio) in each somite
  through which the pericardium passes. There are seven pairs of these
  _veno-pericardiac vertical muscles_ in Scorpio, and eight in Limulus
  (see figs. 30, 31, 32). It is obvious that the contraction of these
  muscles must cause a depression of the floor of the pericardium and a
  rising of the roof of the ventral blood sinus, and a consequent
  increase of volume and flow of blood to each. Whether the pericardium
  and the ventral sinus are made to expand simultaneously or all the
  movement is made by one only of the surfaces concerned, must depend on
  conditions of tension. In any case it is clear that we have in these
  muscles an apparatus for causing the blood to flow differentially in
  increased volume into either the pericardium, through the veins
  leading from the respiratory organs, or from the body generally into
  the great sinuses which bring the blood to the respiratory organs.
  These muscles act so as to pump the blood through the respiratory
  organs.

  [Illustration: FIG 25.--Section through one of the central eyes of a
  young Limulus.

    L, Cuticular or corneous lens.
    hy, Epidermic cell-layer.
    corn, Its corneagen portion immediately underlying the lens.
    ret, Retinula cells.
    nf, Nerve fibres.
    con. tiss, Connective tissue (mesoblastic skeletal tissue).

  (After Lankester and Bourne, _Q. J. Mic. Sci._, 1883.)]

  It is not surprising that with so highly developed an arterial system
  Limulus and Scorpio should have a highly developed mechanism for
  determining the flow of blood to the respiratory organs. That this is,
  so to speak, a need of animals with localized respiratory organs is
  seen by the existence of provisions serving a similar purpose in other
  animals, e.g. the branchial hearts of the Cephalopoda.

  The veno-pericardiac muscles of Scorpio were seen and figured by
  Newport but not described by him. Those of Limulus were described and
  figured by Alphonse Milne-Edwards, but he called them merely
  "transparent ligaments," and did not discover their muscular
  structure. They are figured and their importance for the first time
  recognized in the memoir on the muscular and skeletal systems of
  Limulus and Scorpio by Lankester, Beck and Bourne (4).

  6. _Alimentary Canal and Gastric Glands._--The alimentary canal in
  Scorpio, as in Limulus, is provided with a powerful suctorial pharynx,
  in the working of which extrinsic muscles take a part. The mouth is
  relatively smaller in Scorpio than in Limulus--in fact is minute, as
  it is in all the terrestrial Arachnida which suck the juices of either
  animals or plants. In both, the alimentary canal takes a straight
  course from the pharynx (which bends under it downwards and backwards
  towards the mouth in Limulus) to the anus, and is a simple, narrow,
  cylindrical tube (fig. 33). The only point in which the gut of Limulus
  resembles that of Scorpio rather than that of any of the Crustacea, is
  in possessing more than a single pair of ducts or lateral outgrowths
  connected with ramified gastric glands or gastric caeca. Limulus has
  two pairs of these, Scorpio as many as six pairs. The Crustacea never
  have more than one pair. The minute microscopic structure of the
  gastric glands in the two animals is practically identical. The
  functions of these gastric diverticula have never been carefully
  investigated. It is very probable that in Scorpio they do not serve
  merely to secrete a digestive fluid (shown in other Arthropoda to
  resemble the pancreatic fluid), but that they also become distended by
  the juices of the prey sucked in by the scorpion--as certainly must
  occur in the case of the simple unbranched gastric caeca of the
  spiders.

  The most important difference which exists between the structure of
  Limulus and that of Scorpio is found in the hinder region of the
  alimentary canal. Scorpio is here provided with a single or double
  pair of renal excretory tubes, which have been identified by earlier
  authors with the Malpighian tubes of the Hexapod and Myriapod insects.
  Limulus is devoid of any such tubes. We shall revert to this subject
  below.

  [Illustration: FIG. 26.

    A, Diagram of a retinula of the central eye of a scorpion consisting
      of five retina-cells (ret), with adherent branched pigment cells
      (pig).
    B, Rhabdom of the same, consisting of five confluent rhabdomeres.
    C, Transverse section of the rhabdom of a retinula of the scorpion's
      central eye, showing its five constituent rhabdomeres as rays of a
      star.
    D, Transverse section of a retinula of the lateral eye of Limulus,
      showing ten retinula cells (ret), each bearing a rhabdomere (rhab).

  (After Lankester.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 27.--Diagram showing the position of the coxal
  glands of a scorpion, _Buthus australis_, Lin., in relation to the
  legs, diaphragm (entosternal flap), and the gastric caeca.

    1 to 6, The bases of the six prosomatic limbs.
    A, prosomatic gastric gland (sometimes called salivary).
    B, Coxal gland.
    C, Diaphragm of Newport = fibrous flap of the entosternum.
    D, Mesosomatic gastric caeca (so-called liver).
    E, Alimentary canal.

  (From Lankester, _Q. J. Mic. Sci._, vol. xxiv. N.S. p. 152.)]

  7. _Ovaries and Spermaries: Gonocoels and Gonoducts._--The scorpion is
  remarkable for having the specialized portion of coelom from the walls
  of which egg-cells or sperm-cells are developed according to sex, in
  the form of a simple but extensive network. It is not a pair of simple
  tubes, nor of dendriform tubes, but a closed network. The same fact is
  true of Limulus, as was shown by Owen (7) in regard to the ovary, and
  by Benham (14) in regard to the testis. This is a very definite and
  remarkable agreement, since such a reticular gonocoel is not found in
  Crustacea (except in the male Apus). Moreover, there is a significant
  agreement in the character of the spermatozoa of Limulus and Scorpio.
  The Crustacea are--with the exception of the Cirrhipedia--remarkable
  for having stiff, motionless spermatozoids. In Limulus Lankester found
  (15) the spermatozoa to possess active flagelliform "tails," and to
  resemble very closely those of Scorpio which, as are those of most
  terrestrial Arthropoda, are actively motile. This is a microscopic
  point of agreement, but is none the less significant.

  In regard to the important structures concerned with the fertilization
  of the egg, Limulus and Scorpio differ entirely from one another. The
  eggs of Limulus are fertilized in the sea after they have been laid.
  Scorpio, being a terrestrial animal, fertilizes by copulation. The
  male possesses elaborate copulatory structures of a chitinous nature,
  and the eggs are fertilized in the female without even quitting the
  place where they are formed on the wall of the reticular gonocoel. The
  female scorpion is viviparous, and the young are produced in a highly
  developed condition as fully formed scorpions.

  [Illustration: FIG. 28.--The right coxal gland of _Limulus
  polyphemus_, Latr.

    a^2 to a^5, Posterior borders of the chitinous bases of the coxae of
      the second, third, fourth and fifth prosomatic limbs.
    b, Longitudinal lobe or stolon of the coxal gland.
    c, Its four transverse lobes or outgrowths corresponding to the four
      coxae.

  (From Lankester, _loc. cit_, after Packard.)]

  _Differences between Limulus and Scorpio._--We have now passed in
  review the principal structural features in which Limulus agrees with
  Scorpio and differs from other Arthropoda. There remains for
  consideration the one important structural difference between the two
  animals. Limulus agrees with the majority of the Crustacea in being
  destitute of renal excretory caeca or tubes opening into the hinder
  part of the gut. Scorpio, on the other hand, in common with all
  air-breathing Arthropoda except Peripatus, possesses these tubules,
  which are often called Malpighian tubes. A great deal has been made of
  this difference by some writers. It has been considered by them as
  proving that Limulus, in spite of all its special agreements with
  Scorpio (which, however, have scarcely been appreciated by the writers
  in question), really belongs to the Crustacean line of descent, whilst
  Scorpio, by possessing Malpighian tubes, is declared to be
  unmistakably tied together with the other Arachnida to the tracheate
  Arthropods, the Hexapods, Diplopods, and Chilopods, which all possess
  Malpighian tubes.

  [Illustration: FIG. 29.--Diagram of the arterial system of A, Scorpio,
  and B, Limulus. The Roman numerals indicate the body somites and the
  two figures are adjusted for comparison. ce, Cerebral arteries; sp,
  supra-spinal or medullary artery; c, caudal artery; l, lateral
  anastomotic artery of Limulus. The figure B also shows the peculiar
  neural investiture formed by the cerebral arteries in Limulus and the
  derivation from this of the arteries to the limbs, III, IV, VI,
  whereas in Scorpio the latter have a separate origin from the anterior
  aorta.

  (From Lankester, "Limulus an Arachnid.")]

  It must be pointed out that the presence or absence of such renal
  excretory tubes opening into the intestine appears to be a question of
  adaptation to the changed physiological conditions of respiration, and
  not of morphological significance, since a pair of renal excretory
  tubes of this nature is found in certain Amphipod Crustacea
  (Talorchestia, &c.) which have abandoned a purely aquatic life. This
  view has been accepted and supported by Professors Korschelt and
  Heider (16). An important fact in its favour was discovered by Laurie
  (17), who investigated the embryology of two species of Scorpio under
  Lankester's direction. It appears that the Malpighian tubes of Scorpio
  are developed from the mesenteron, viz. that portion of the gut which
  is formed by the hypoblast, whereas in Hexapod insects the similar
  caecal tubes are developed from the proctodaeum or in-pushed portion
  of the gut which is formed from epiblast. In fact it is not possible
  to maintain that the renal excretory tubes of the gut are of one
  common origin in the Arthropoda. They have appeared independently in
  connexion with a change in the excretion of nitrogenous waste in
  Arachnids, Crustacea, and the other classes of Arthropoda when aerial,
  as opposed to aquatic, respiration has been established--and they have
  been formed in some cases from the mesenteron, in other cases from the
  proctodaeum. Their appearance in the air-breathing Arachnids does not
  separate those forms from the water-breathing Arachnids which are
  devoid of them, any more than does their appearance in certain
  Amphipoda separate those Crustaceans from the other members of the
  class.

  Further, it is pointed out by Korschelt and Heider that the hinder
  portion of the gut frequently acts in Arthropoda as an organ of
  nitrogenous excretion in the absence of any special excretory tubules,
  and that the production of such caeca from its surface in separate
  lines of descent does not involve any elaborate or unlikely process of
  growth. In other words, the Malpighian tubes of the terrestrial
  Arachnida are _homoplastic_ with those of Hexapoda and Myriapoda, and
  not _homogenetic_ with them. We are compelled to take a similar view
  of the agreement between the tracheal air-tubes of Arachnida and other
  tracheate Arthropods. They are homoplasts (see 18) one of another, and
  do not owe their existence in the various classes compared to a common
  inheritance of an ancestral tracheal system.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--View from below of a scorpion (_Buthus
occitanus_) opened and dissected so as to show the pericardium with its
muscles, the lateral arteries, and the tergo-sternal muscles.

    PRO, Prosoma.
    dpm, Dorso-plastral muscle.
    art, Lateral artery.
    tsm^1, Tergo-sternal muscle (labelled dv in fig. 31) of the second
      (pectiniferous) mesosomatic somite; this is the most anterior pair
      of the series of six, none are present in the genital somite.
    tsm^4, Tergo-sternal muscle of the fifth mesosomatic somite.
    tsm^6, Tergo-sternal muscle of the enlarged first metasomatic
      somite.
    Per, Pericardium.
    VPM^1 to VPM^7, The series of seven pairs of veno-pericardiac
      muscles (labelled pv in fig. 31).

    There is some reason to admit the existence of another more anterior
    pair of these muscles in Scorpio; this would make the number exactly
    correspond with the number in Limulus.

(After Lankester, _Trans. Zool. Soc._ vol. xi, 1883.)]

_Conclusions arising from the Close Affinity of Limulus and
Scorpio._--When we consider the relationships of the various classes of
Arthropoda, having accepted and established the fact of the close
genetic affinity of Limulus and Scorpio, we are led to important
conclusions. In such a consideration we have to make use not only of the
fact just mentioned, but of three important generalizations which serve
as it were as implements for the proper estimation of the relationships
of any series of organic forms. First of all there is the generalization
that the relationships of the various forms of animals (or of plants) to
one another is that of the ultimate twigs of a much-branching
genealogical tree. Secondly, identity of structure in two organisms does
not necessarily indicate that the identical structure has been inherited
from an ancestor common to the two organisms compared (homogeny), but
may be due to independent development of a like structure in two
different lines of descent (homoplasy). Thirdly, those members of a
group which, whilst exhibiting undoubted structural characters
indicative of their proper assignment to that group, yet are simpler
than and inferior in elaboration of their organization to other members
of the group, are not necessarily representatives of the earlier and
primitive phases in the development of the group--but are very often
examples of retrogressive change or degeneration. The second and third
implements of analysis above cited are of the nature of cautions or
checks. Agreements are not _necessarily_ due to common inheritance;
simplicity is not _necessarily_ primitive and ancestral.

On the other hand, we must not rashly set down agreements as due to
"homoplasy" or "convergence of development" if we find two or three or
more concurrent agreements. The probability is against agreement being
due to homoplasy when the agreement involves a number of really separate
(not correlated) coincidences. Whilst the chances are in favour of some
_one_ homoplastic coincidence or structural agreement occurring between
some member or other of a large group a and some member or other of a
large group b, the matter is very different when by such an initial
coincidence the two members have been particularized. The chances
against these two selected members exhibiting _another_ really
independent homoplastic agreement are enormous: let us say 10,000 to 1.
The chances against yet another coincidence are a hundred million to
one, and against yet one more "coincidence" they are the square of a
hundred million to one. Homoplasy can only be assumed when the
coincidence is of a simple nature, and is such as may be reasonably
supposed to have arisen by the action of like selective conditions upon
like material in two separate lines of descent.[4]

So, too, degeneration is not to be lightly assumed as the explanation of
a simplicity of structure. There is a very definite criterion of the
simplicity due to degeneration, which can in most cases be applied.
Degenerative simplicity is never uniformly distributed over all the
structures of the organism. It affects many or nearly all the structures
of the body, but leaves some, it may be only one, at a high level of
elaboration and complexity. Ancestral simplicity is more uniform, and
does not co-exist with specialization and elaboration of a single organ.
Further: degeneration cannot be inferred safely by the examination of an
isolated case; usually we obtain a series of forms indicating the steps
of a change in structure--and what we have to decide is whether the
movement has been from the simple to the more complex, or from the more
complex to the simple. The feathers of a peacock afford a convenient
example of primitive and degenerative simplicity. The highest point of
elaboration in colour, pattern and form is shown by the great
eye-painted tail feathers. From these we can pass by gradual transitions
in two directions, viz. either to the simple lateral tail feathers with
a few rami only, developed only on one side of the shaft and of uniform
metallic coloration--or to the simple contour feathers of small size,
with the usual symmetrical series of numerous rami right and left of the
shaft and no remarkable colouring. The one-sided specialization and the
peculiar metallic colouring of the lateral tail feathers mark them as
the extreme terms of a degenerative series, whilst the symmetry,
likeness of constituent parts _inter se_, and absence of specialized
pigment, as well as the fact that they differ little from any average
feather of birds in general, mark the contour feather as primitively
simple, and as the starting-point from which the highly elaborated
eye-painted tail feather has gradually evolved.

Applying these principles to the consideration of the Arachnida, we
arrive at the conclusion that the smaller and simpler Arachnids are not
the more primitive, but that the Acari or mites are, in fact, a
degenerate group. This was maintained by Lankester in 1878 (19), again
in 1881 (20); it was subsequently announced as a novelty by Claus in
1885 (21). Though the aquatic members of a class of animals are in some
instances derived from terrestrial forms, the usual transition is from
an aquatic ancestry to more recent land-living forms. There is no doubt,
from a consideration of the facts of structure, that the aquatic
water-breathing Arachnids, represented in the past by the Eurypterines
and to-day by the sole survivor Limulus, have preceded the terrestrial
air-breathing forms of that group. Hence we see at once that the
better-known Arachnida form a series, leading from Limulus-like aquatic
creatures through scorpions, spiders and harvest-men, to the degenerate
Acari or mites. The spiders are specialized and reduced in apparent
complexity, as compared with the scorpions, but they cannot be regarded
as degenerate since the concentration of structure which occurs in them
results in greater efficiency and power than are exhibited by the
scorpion. The determination of the relative degree of perfection of
organization attained by two animals compared is difficult when we
introduce, as seems inevitable, the question of efficiency and power,
and do not confine the question to the perfection of morphological
development. We have no measure of the degree of power manifested by
various animals--though it would be possible to arrive at some
conclusions as to how that "power" should be estimated. It is not
possible here to discuss that matter further. We must be content to
point out that it seems that the spiders, the pedipalps, and other large
Arachnids have not been derived from the scorpions directly, but have
independently developed from aquatic ancestors, and from one of these
independent groups--probably through the harvest-men from the
spiders--the Acari have finally resulted.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.--Diagram of a lateral view of a longitudinal
section of a scorpion.

After Beck, _Trans. Zool. Soc._ VOL. xi., 1883.

  d, Chelicera.
  ch, Chela.
  cam_, Camerostome.
  m, Mouth.
  ent_, Entosternum.
  p, Pecten.
  stig^1, First pulmonary aperture.
  stig^4, Fourth pulmonary aperture.
  dam, Muscle from carapace to a praeoral entosclerite.
  ad, Muscle from carapace to entosternum.
  md, Muscle from tergite of genital somite to entosternum (same as dpm
    in fig. 30).
  dv^1 to dv^6, Dorso-ventral muscles (same as the series labelled tsm
    in fig. 30).
  pv^1 to pv^7, The seven veno-pericardiac muscles of the right side
    (labelled VPM in fig. 30).]

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--Diagram of a lateral view of a longitudinal
section of Limulus.

After Benham, _Trans Zool. Soc._ vol. xi, 1883.

  Suc, Suctorial pharynx.
  al, Alimentary canal.
  Ph, Pharynx.
  M, Mouth.
  Est, Entosternum.
  VS, Ventral venous sinus.
  chi, Chilaria.
  go, Genital operculum.
  br^1 to br^5, Branchial appendages,
  met, Unsegmented metasoma.
  Entap^4, Fourth dorsal entapophysis of left side.
  tsm, Tergo-sternal muscles, six pairs as in Scorpio (labelled dv in
    fig. 31).
  VPM^1 to VPM^8, The eight pairs of veno-pericardiac muscles (labelled
    pv in fig. 31). VPM^1 is probably represented in Scorpio, though not
    marked in figs. 30 and 31.]

Leaving that question for consideration in connexion with the systematic
statement of the characters of the various groups of Arachnida which
follows on p. 299, it is well now to consider the following question,
viz., seeing that Limulus and Scorpio are such highly developed and
specialized forms, and that they seem to constitute as it were the first
and second steps in the series of recognized Arachnida--what do we know,
or what are we led to suppose with regard to the more primitive
Arachnida from which the Eurypterines and Limulus and Scorpio have
sprung? Do we know in the recent or fossil condition any such primitive
Arachnids? Such a question is not only legitimate, but prompted by the
analogy of at least one other great class of Arthropods. The great
Arthropod class, the Crustacea, presents to the zoologist at the present
day an immense range of forms, comprising the primitive phyllopods, the
minute copepods, the parasitic cirrhipedes and the powerful crabs and
lobsters, and the highly elaborated sand-hoppers and slaters. It has
been insisted, by those who accepted Lankester's original doctrine of
the direct or genetic affinity of the Chaetopoda and Arthropoda, that
Apus and Branchipus really come very near to the ancestral forms which
connected those two great branches of Appendiculate (Parapodiate)
animals. On the other hand, the land crabs are at an immense distance
from these simple forms. The record of the Crustacean family-tree is, in
fact, a fairly complete one--the lower primitive members of the group
are still represented by living forms in great abundance. In the case of
the Arachnida, if we have to start their genealogical history with
Limulus and Scorpio, we are much in the same position as we should be in
dealing with the Crustacea, were the whole of the Entomostraca and the
whole of the Arthrostraca wiped out of existence and record. There is no
possibility of doubt that the series of forms corresponding in the
Arachnidan line of descent, to the forms distinguished in the Crustacean
line of descent as the lower grade--the Entomostraca--have ceased to
exist, and not only so, but have left little evidence in the form of
fossils as to their former existence and nature. It must, however, be
admitted as probable that we should find some evidence, in ancient rocks
or in the deep sea, of the early more primitive Arachnids. And it must
be remembered that such forms must be expected to exhibit, when found,
differences from Limulus and Scorpio as great as those which separate
Apus and Cancer. The existing Arachnida, like the higher Crustacea, are
"nomomeristic," that is to say, have a fixed typical number of somites
to the body. Further, they are like the higher Crustacea,
"somatotagmic," that is to say, they have this limited set of somites
grouped in three (or more) "tagmata" or regions of a fixed number of
similarly modified somites --each tagma differing in the modification of
its fixed number of somites from that characterizing a neighbouring
"tagma." The most primitive among the lower Crustacea, on the other
hand, for example, the Phyllopoda, have not a fixed number of somites,
some genera--even allied species--have more, some less, within wide
limits; they are "anomomeristic." They also, as is generally the case
with anomomeristic animals, do not exhibit any conformity to a fixed
plan of "tagmatism" or division of the somites of the body into regions
sharply marked off from one another; the head or prosomatic tagma is
followed by a trunk consisting of somites which either graduate in
character as we pass along the series or exhibit a large variety in
different genera, families and orders, of grouping of the somites. They
are anomotagmic, as well as anomomeristic.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.--The alimentary canal and gastric glands of a
scorpion (A) and of Limulus (B).

From Lankester, "Limulua an Arachnid."

  ps, Muscular suctorial enlargement of the pharynx.
  sal, Prosomatic pair of gastric caeca in Scorpio, called salivary
    glands by some writers.
  c^1, and c^2, The anterior two pairs of gastric caeca and ducts of
    the mesosomatic region.
  c^3, c^4 and c^5. Caeca and ducts of Scorpio not represented in
    Limulus.
  M, The Malpighian or renal caecal diverticula of Scorpio.
  pro, The proctodaeum or portion of gut leading to anus and formed
    embryologically by an inversion of the epiblast at that orifice.]

When it is admitted--as seems to be reasonable--that the primitive
Arachnida would, like the primitive Crustacea, be anomomeristic and
anomotagmic, we shall not demand of claimants for the rank of primitive
Arachnids agreement with Limulus and Scorpio in respect of the exact
number of their somites and the exact grouping of those somites; and
when we see how diverse are the modifications of the branches of the
appendages both in Arachnida and in other classes of Arthropoda (q.v.),
we shall not over-estimate a difference in the form of this or that
appendage exhibited by the claimant as compared with the higher
Arachnids. With those considerations in mind, the claim of the extinct
group of the trilobites to be considered as representatives of the lower
and more primitive steps in the Arachnidan genealogy must, it seems,
receive a favourable judgment. They differ from the Crustacea in that
they have only a single pair of prae-oral appendages, the second pair
being definitely developed as mandibles. This fact renders their
association with the Crustacea impossible, if classification is to be
the expression of genetic affinity inferred from structural coincidence.
On the contrary, this particular point is one in which they agree with
the higher Arachnida. But little is known of the structure of these
extinct animals; we are therefore compelled to deal with such special
points of resemblance and difference as their remains still exhibit.
They had lateral eyes[5] which resemble no known eyes so closely as the
lateral eyes of Limulus. The general form and structure of their
prosomatic carapace are in many striking features identical with that of
Limulus. The trilobation of the head and body--due to the expansion and
flattening of the sides or "pleura" of the tegumentary skeleton--is so
closely repeated in the young of Limulus that the latter has been called
"the trilobite stage" of Limulus (fig. 42 compared with fig. 41). No
Crustacean exhibits this trilobite form. But most important of the
evidences presented by the trilobites of affinity with Limulus, and
therefore with the Arachnida, is the tendency less marked in some,
strongly carried out in others, to form a pygidial or telsonic shield--a
fusion of the posterior somites of the body, which is precisely
identical in character with the metasomatic carapace of Limulus. When to
this is added the fact that a post-anal spine is developed to a large
size in some trilobites (fig. 38), like that of Limulus and Scorpio, and
that lateral spines on the pleura of the somites are frequent as in
Limulus, and that neither metasomatic fusion of somites nor post-anal
spine, nor lateral pleural spines are found in any Crustacean, nor all
three together in any Arthropod besides the trilobites and Limulus--the
claim of the trilobites to be considered as representing one order of a
lower grade of Arachnida, comparable to the grade Entomostraca of the
Crustacea, seems to be established.

The fact that the single pair of prae-oral appendages of trilobites,
known only as yet in one genus, is in that particular case a pair of
uni-ramose antennae--does not render the association of trilobites and
Arachnids improbable. Although the prae-oral pair of appendages in the
higher Arachnida is usually chelate, it is not always so; in spiders it
is not so; nor in many Acari. The bi-ramose structure of the post-oral
limbs, demonstrated by Beecher in the trilobite Triarthrus, is no more
inconsistent with its claim to be a primitive Arachnid than is the
foliaceous modification of the limbs in Phyllopods inconsistent with
their relationship to the Arthrostracous Crustaceans such as Gammarus
and Oniscus.

Thus, then, it seems that we have in the trilobites the representatives
of the lower phases of the Arachnidan pedigree. The simple anomomeristic
trilobite, with its equi-formal somites and equi-formal appendages, is
one term of the series which ends in the even more simple but degenerate
Acari. Between the two and at the highest point of the arc, so far as
morphological differentiation is concerned, stands the scorpion; near to
it in the trilobite's direction (that is, on the ascending side) are
Limulus and the Eurypterines--with a long gap, due to obliteration of
the record, separating them from the trilobite. On the other
side--tending downwards from the scorpion towards the Acari--are the
Pedipalpi, the spiders, the book-scorpions, the harvest-men and the
water-mites.

The strange nobody-crabs or Pycnogonids occupy a place on the ascending
half of the arc below the Eurypterines and Limulus. They are strangely
modified and degenerate, but seem to be (as explained in the systematic
review) the remnant of an Arachnidan group holding the same relation to
the scorpions which the Laemodipoda hold to the Podophthalmate
Crustacea.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have now to offer a classification of the Arachnida and to pass in
review the larger groups, with a brief statement of their structural
characteristics.

In the bibliography at the close of this article (referred to by leaded
arabic numerals in brackets throughout these pages), the titles of works
are given which contain detailed information as to the genera and
species of each order or sub-order, their geographical distribution and
their habits and economy so far as they have been ascertained. The
limits of space do not permit of a fuller treatment of those matters
here.

            TABULAR CLASSIFICATION[6] OF THE ARACHNIDA.

                        CLASS. ARACHNIDA.

  _Grade A. ANOMOMERISTICA._
    Sub-Class. TRILOBITAE.
      Orders. Not satisfactorily determined.

  _Grade B. NOMOMERISTICA._
    Sub-Class I. PANTOPODA.
      Order 1. Nymphonomorpha.
        "   2. Ascorhynchomorpha.
        "   3. Pycnogonomorpha.
    Sub-Class II. EU-ARACHNIDA.
          Grade a. DELOBRANCHIA, Lankester (_vel_ HYDROPNEUSTEA, Pocock).
      Order 1. Xiphosura.
        "   2. Gigantostraca.
          Grade b. EMBOLOBRANCHIA, Lankester (_vel_ AEROPNEUSTEA, Pocock).
              _Section_ [alpha]. _Pectinifera._
      Order 1. Scorpionidea.
           Sub-order a. Apoxypoda.
               "     b. Dionychopoda.
               _Section_ [beta]. _Epectinata._
      Order 2. Pedipalpi.
           Sub-order a. Uropygi.
                           Tribe 1. Urotricha.
                             "   2. Tartarides.
           Sub-order b. Amblypygi.
      Order 3. Araneae.
           Sub-order a. Mesothelae.
               "     b. Opisthothelae.
                           Tribe 1. Mygalomorphae.
                             "   2. Arachnomorphae.
      Order 4. Palpigradi (= Microthelyphonidae).
      Order 5. Solifugae (= Mycetophorae).
      Order 6. Pseudoscorpiones (= Chelonethi).
           Sub-order a. Panctenodactyli.
               "     b. Hemirtenodactyli.
      Order 7. Podogona (= Ricinulel).
      Order 8. Opiliones.
           Sub-order a. Laniatores.
               "     b. Palpatores.
               "     c. Anepignathi.
      Order 9. Rhynchostomi (= Acari).
           Sub-order a. Notostigmata.
               "     b. Cryptostigmata.
               "     c. Metastigmata.
               "     d. Prostigmata.
               "     e. Astigmata.
               "     f. Vermiformia.
               "     g. Tetrapoda.

  CLASS. ARACHNIDA.--Euarthropoda having two prosthomeres (somites which
  have passed from a post-oral to a prae-oral position), the appendages
  of the first represented by eyes, of the second by solitary rami which
  are rarely antenniform, more usually chelate. A tendency is exhibited
  to the formation of a metasomatic as well as a prosomatic carapace by
  fusion of the tergal surfaces of the somites. Intermediate somites
  forming a mesosoma occur, but tend to fuse superficially with the
  metasomatic carapace or to become co-ordinated with the somites of the
  metasoma, whether fused or distinct to form one region, the
  opisthosoma (abdomen of authors). In the most highly developed forms
  the two anterior divisions (tagmata) of the body, prosoma and
  mesosoma, each exhibit six pairs of limbs, pediform and plate-like
  respectively, whilst the metasoma consists of six limbless somites and
  a post-anal spine. The genital apertures are placed in the first
  somite following the prosoma, excepting where a praegenital somite,
  usually suppressed, is retained. Little is known of the form of the
  appendages in the lowest archaic Arachnida, but the tendency of those
  of the prosomatic somites has been (as in the Crustacea) to pass from
  a generalized bi-ramose or multi-ramose form to that of uni-ramose
  antennae, chelae and walking legs.

  The Arachnida are divisible into two grades of structure--according to
  the fixity or non-fixity of the number of somites building up the
  body:--

  _Grade A_ (_of the Arachnida_). _ANOMOMERISTICA._--Extinct archaic
  Arachnida, in which (as in the Entomostracous Crustacea) the number of
  well-developed somites may be more or less than eighteen and may be
  grouped only as head (prosoma) and trunk or may be further
  differentiated. A telsonic tergal shield of greater or less size is
  always present, which may be imperfectly divided into well-marked but
  immovable tergites indicating incompletely differentiated somites. The
  single pair of palpiform appendages in front of the mouth has been
  found in one instance to be antenniform, whilst the numerous post-oral
  appendages in the same genus were bi-ramose. The position of the
  genital apertures is not known. Compound lateral eyes present; median
  eyes wanting. The body and head have the two pleural regions of each
  somite flattened and expanded on either side of the true gut-holding
  body-axis. Hence the name of the sub-class signifying tri-lobed, a
  condition realized also in the Xiphosurous Arachnids. The members of
  this group, whilst resembling the lower Crustacea (as all lower groups
  of a branching genealogical tree must do), differ from them
  essentially in that the head exhibits only one prosthomere (in
  addition to the eye-bearing prosthomere) with palpiform appendages (as
  in all Arachnida) instead of two. The Anomomeristic Arachnida form a
  single sub-class, of which only imperfect fossil remains are known.

  Sub-class (of the Anomomeristica). TRILOBITAE.--The single sub-class
  Trilobitae constitutes the grade Anomomeristica. It has been variously
  divided into orders by a number of writers. The greater or less
  evolution and specialization of the metasomatic carapace appears to be
  the most important basis for classification--but this has not been
  made use of in the latest attempts at drawing up a system of the
  Trilobites. The form of the middle and lateral regions of the
  prosomatic shield has been used, and an excessive importance attached
  to the demarcation of certain areas in that structure. Sutures are
  stated to mark off some of these pieces, but in the proper sense of
  that term as applied to the skeletal structures of the Vertebrata, no
  sutures exist in the chitinous cuticle of Arthropoda. That any partial
  fusion of originally distinct chitinous plates takes place in the
  cephalic shield of Trilobites, comparable to the partial fusion of
  bony pieces by suture in Vertebrata, is a suggestion contrary to fact.

  The Trilobites are known only as fossils, mostly Silurian and
  prae-Silurian; a few are found in Carboniferous and Permian strata. As
  many as two thousand species are known. Genera with small metasomatic
  carapace, consisting of three to six fused segments distinctly marked
  though not separated by soft membrane, are _Harpes_, _Paradoxides_ and
  _Triarthrus_ (fig. 34). In _Calymene_, _Homalonotus_ and _Phacops_
  (fig. 38) from six to sixteen segments are clearly marked by ridges
  and grooves in the metasomatic tagma, whilst in _Illaenus_ the shield
  so formed is large but no somites are marked out on its surface. In
  this genus ten free somites (mesosoma) occur between the prosomatic
  and metasomatic carapaces. _Asaphus_ and _Megalaspis_ (fig. 39) are
  similarly constituted. In _Agnostus_ (fig. 40) the anterior and
  posterior carapaces constitute almost the entire body, the two
  carapaces being connected by a mid-region of only two free somites. It
  has been held that the forms with a small number of somites marked in
  the posterior carapace and numerous free somites between the anterior
  and posterior carapace, must be considered as anterior to those in
  which a great number of posterior somites are traceable in the
  metasomatic carapace, and that those in which the traces of distinct
  somites in the posterior or metasomatic carapace are most completely
  absent must be regarded as derived from those in which somites are
  well marked in the posterior carapace and similar in appearance to
  the free somites. The genus _Agnostus_, which belongs to the last
  category, occurs abundantly in Cambrian strata and is one of the
  earliest forms known. This would lead to the supposition that the
  great development of metasomatic carapace is a primitive and not a
  late character, were it not for the fact that _Paradoxides_ and
  _Atops_, with an inconspicuous telsonic carapace and numerous free
  somites, are also Cambrian in age, the latter indeed anterior in
  horizon to _Agnostus_.

  [Illustration: FIG. 34.--Restoration of _Triarthrus Becki_, Green, as
  determined by Beecher from specimens obtained from the Utica Slates
  (Ordovician), New York. A, dorsal; B, ventral surface. In the latter
  the single pair of antennae springing up from each side of the
  camerostome or hypostome or upper lip-lobe are seen. Four pairs of
  appendages besides these are seen to belong to the cephalic tergum.
  All the appendages are pediform and bi-ramose; all have a prominent
  gnathobase, and in all the exopodite carries a comb-like series of
  secondary processes.

  (After Beecher, from Zittel.) ]

  On the other hand, it may well be doubted whether the pygidial or
  posterior carapace is primarily due to a fusion of the tergites of
  somites which were previously movable and well developed. The
  posterior carapace of the Trilobites and of _Limulus_ is probably
  enough in origin a telsonic carapace--that is to say, is the tergum of
  the last segment of the body which carries the anus. From the front of
  this region new segments are produced in the first instance, and are
  added during growth to the existing series. This telson may enlarge,
  it may possibly even become internally and sternally developed as
  partially separate somites, and the tergum may remain without trace of
  somite formation, or, as appears to be the case in _Limulus_, the
  telson gives rise to a few well-marked somites (mesosoma and two
  others) and then enlarges without further trace of segmentation,
  whilst the chitinous integument which develops in increasing thickness
  on the terga as growth advances welds together the unsegmented telson
  and the somites in front of it, which were previously marked by
  separate tergal thickenings. It must always be remembered that we are
  liable (especially in the case of fossilized integuments) to attach an
  unwarranted interpretation to the mere discontinuity or continuity of
  the thickened plates of chitinous cuticle on the back of an Arthropod.
  These plates may fuse, and yet the somites to which they belong may
  remain distinct, and each have its pair of appendages well developed.
  On the other hand, an unusually large tergal plate, whether terminal
  or in the series, is not always due to fusion of the dorsal plates of
  once-separate somites, but is often a case of growth and enlargement
  of a single somite without formation of any trace of a new somite. For
  the literature of Trilobites see (22*).

  [Illustration: FIG. 35.--_Triarthrus Becki_, Green. a, Restored
  thoracic limbs in transverse section of the animal; b, section across
  a posterior somite; c, section across one of the sub-terminal somites.

  (After Beecher.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 36.--_Triarthrus Becki_, Green. Dorsal view of
  second thoracic leg with and without setae. en, Inner ramus; ex, Outer
  ramus.

  (After Beecher.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 37.--_Deiphon Forbesii_, Barr. One of the
  Cheiruridae. Silurian Bohemia.

  (From Zittel's Palaeontology.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 38.--_Dalmanites Kmulurus_, Green. One of the
  _Phacopidae_, from the Silurian, New York.

  (From Zittel.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 39.--_Megalaspis extenuatus_. One of the
  _Asaphidae_ allied to _Illaenus_, from the Ordovician of East
  Gothland, Sweden.

  (From Zittel.)]

  _Grade B (of the Aracknida) NOMOMERISTICA._--Arachnida in which,
  excluding from consideration the eye-bearing prosthomere, the somites
  are primarily (that is to say, in the common ancestor of the grade)
  grouped in three regions of six--(a) the "prosoma" with palpiform
  appendages, (b) the "mesosoma" with plate-like appendages, and (c) the
  "metasoma" with suppressed appendages. A somite placed between the
  prosoma and mesosoma --the prae-genital somite--appears to have
  belonged originally to the prosomatic series (which with its ocular
  prosthomere and palpiform limbs [Pantopoda], would thus consist of
  eight somites), but to have been gradually reduced. In living
  Arachnids, excepting the Pantopoda, it is either fused (with loss of
  its appendages) with the prosoma (_Limulus_,[7] _Scorpio_), after
  embryonic appearance, or is retained as a rudimentary, separate,
  detached somite in front of the mesosoma, or disappears altogether
  (excalation). The atrophy and total disappearance of ancestrally
  well-marked somites frequently take place (as in all Arthropoda) at
  the posterior extremity of the body, whilst excalation of somites may
  occur at the constricted areas which often separate adjacent
  "regions," though there are very few instances in which it has been
  recognized. Concentration of the organ-systems by fusion of
  neighbouring regions (prosoma, mesosoma, metasoma), previously
  distinct, has frequently occurred, together with obliteration of the
  muscular and chitinous structures indicative of distinct somites. This
  concentration and obliteration of somites, often accompanied by
  dislocation of important segmental structures (such as appendages and
  nerve-ganglia), may lead to highly developed specialization
  (individuation, H. Spencer), as in the Araneae and Opiliones, and, on
  the other hand, may terminate in simplification and degeneration, as
  in the Acari.

  [Illustration: FIG. 40.--Four stages in the development of the
  trilobite _Agnostus nudus_. A, Youngest stage with no mesosomatic
  somites; B and C, stages with two mesosomatic somites between the
  prosomatic and telsonic carapaces; D, adult condition, still with only
  two free mesosomatic somites.

  (From Korschelt and Heider.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 41.--Five Stages in the development of the
  trilobite _Sao hirsuta_.

  From Korschelt and Heider, after Barrande.

    A, Youngest stage.
    B, Older stage with distinct pygidial carapace.
    C, Stage with two free mesosomatic somites between the prosomatic
      and telsonic carapaces.
    D, Stace with seven free intermediate somites.
    E, Stave with twelve free somites; the telsonic carapace has not
      increased in size.
    a, Lateral eye.
    g, So-called facial "suture" (not really a suture).
    p, Telsonic carapace.]

  The most important general change which has affected the structure of
  the nomomeristic Arachnida in the course of their historic development
  is the transition from an aquatic to a terrestrial life. This has been
  accompanied by the conversion of the lamelliform gill-plates into
  lamelliform lung-plates, and later the development from the
  lung-chambers, and at independent sites, of tracheae or air-tubes (by
  adaptation of the vasifactive tissue of the blood-vessels) similar to
  those independently developed in _Peripatus_, Diplopoda, Hexapoda and
  Chilopoda. Probably tracheae have developed independently by the same
  process in several groups of tracheate Arachnids. The nomomeristic
  Arachnids comprise two sub-classes--one a very small degenerate
  offshoot from early ancestors; the other, the great bulk of the class.

  [Illustration: FIG. 42.--So-called "trilobite stage" of _Limulus
  polyphemus_. A, Dorsal; B, ventral view.

  (from Korschelt and Heider, after Leuckart.)]

  Sub-Class I. (of the Nomomeristica). PANTOPODA.--Nomomeristic
  Arachnids, in which the somites corresponding to mesosoma and metasoma
  have entirely aborted. The seventh, and sometimes the eighth,
  leg-bearing somite is present and has its leg-like appendages fully
  developed. Monomeniscous eyes with a double (really triple) cell-layer
  formed by invagination, as in the Eu-arachnida, are present The
  Pantopoda stand in the same relation to _Limulus_ and _Scorpio_ that
  _Cyamus_ holds to the thoracostracous Crustacea. The reduction of the
  organism to seven leg-bearing somites, of which the first pair, as in
  so many Eu-arachnida, are chelate, is a form of degeneration connected
  with a peculiar quasi-parasitic habit resembling that of the
  crustacean Laemodipoda. The genital pores are situate at the base of
  the 7th pair of limbs, and may be repeated on the 4th, 5th, and 6th.
  In all known Pantopoda the size of the body is quite minute as
  compared with that of the limbs: the alimentary canal sends a long
  caecum into each leg (cf. the Araneae) and the genital products are
  developed in gonocoels also placed in the legs.

  [Illustration: FIG. 43.--One of the Nymphonomorphous Pantopoda,
  _Nymphon hispidum_, showing the seven pairs of appendages 1 to 7; ab,
  the rudimentary opisthosoma; s, the mouth-bearing proboscis.

  From Parker and Harwell's _Text-book of Zoology_, after Hoek.]

  The Pantopoda are divided into three orders, the characters of which
  are dependent on variation in the presence of the full number of legs.

  Order 1. (of the Pantopoda). Nymphonomorpha, Pocock (nov.) (fig.
  43).--In primitive forms belonging to the family _Nymphonidae_ the
  full complement of appendages is retained--the 1st (mandibular), the
  2nd (palpiform), and the 3rd (ovigerous) pairs being well developed in
  both sexes. In certain derivative forms constituting the family
  _Pallenidae_, however, the appendages of the 2nd pair are either
  rudimentary or atrophied altogether.

  Two families: 1. Nymphonidae (genus _Nymphon_), and 2. Pallenidae
  (genus _Pallene_).

  Order 2. Ascorhynchomorpha, Pocock (nov.).--Appendages of the 2nd and
  3rd pairs retained and developed, as in the more primitive types of
  Nymphonomorpha; but those of the 1st pair are either rudimentary, as
  in the _Ascorhynchidae_, or atrophied, as in the _Colossendeidae_. In
  the latter a further specialization is shown in the fusion of the body
  segments.

  Two families. 1. Ascorhynchidae (genera _Ascorhynchus_ and
  _Ammothea_); 2. Colossendeidae (genera _Colossendeis_ and
  _Discoarachne_).

  Order 3. Pycnogonomorpha, Pocock (nov.).--Derivative forms in which
  the reduction in number of the anterior appendages is carried farther
  than in the other orders, reaching its extreme in the _Pycnogonidae_,
  where the 1st and 2nd pairs are absent in both sexes, and the 3rd pair
  also are absent in the female. In the _Hannoniidae_, however, which
  resemble the _Pycnogonidae_ in the absence of the 3rd pair in the
  female and of the 2nd pair in both sexes, the 1st pair are retained in
  both sexes.

  Two families: 1. Hannoniidae (genus _Hannonia_); 2. Pycnogonidae
  (genera _Pycnogonum_ and _Phoxichilus_).

  _Remarks._--The Pantopoda are not known in the fossil condition. They
  are entirely marine, and are not uncommon in the coralline zone of the
  sea-coast. The species are few, not more than fifty (23). Some large
  species of peculiar genera are taken at great depths. Their movements
  are extremely sluggish. They are especially remarkable for the small
  size of the body and the extension of viscera into the legs. Their
  structure is eminently that of degenerate forms. Many frequent growths
  of coralline Algae and hydroid polyps, upon the juices of which they
  feed, and in some cases a species of gall is produced in hydroids by
  the penetration of the larval Pantopod into the tissues of the polyp.

  Sub-Class II. (of the Nomomeristic Arachnida). EU-ARACHNIDA.--These
  start from highly developed and specialized aquatic branchiferous
  forms, exhibiting a prosoma with six pediform pairs of appendages, an
  intermediate prae-genital somite, a mesosoma of six somites bearing
  lamelliform pairs of appendages, and a metasoma of six somites devoid
  of appendages, and the last provided with a post-anal spine. Median
  eyes are present, which are monomeniscous, with distinct retinal and
  corneagenous cell-layers, and placed centrally on the prosoma. Lateral
  eyes also may be present, arranged in lateral groups, and having a
  single or double cell-layer beneath the lens. The first pair of limbs
  is often chelate or prehensile, rarely antenniform; whilst the second,
  third and fourth may also be chelate, or may be simple palps or
  walking legs.

  An internal skeletal plate, the so-called "entosternite" of
  fibro-cartilaginous tissue, to which many muscles are attached, is
  placed between the nerve-cords and the alimentary tract in the prosoma
  of the larger forms (_Limulus_, _Scorpio_, _Mygale_). In the same and
  other leading forms a pair of much-coiled glandular tubes, the coxal
  glands (coelomocoels in origin), is found with a duct opening on the
  coxa of the fifth pair of appendages of the prosoma. The vascular
  system is highly developed (in the non-degenerate forms); large
  arterial branches closely accompany or envelop the chief nerves;
  capillaries are well developed. The blood-corpuscles are large
  amoebiform cells, and the blood-plasma is coloured blue by
  haemocyanin.

  The alimentary canal is uncoiled and cylindrical, and gives rise
  laterally to large gastric glands, which are more than a single pair
  in number (two to six pairs), and may assume the form of simple caeca.
  The mouth is minute and the pharynx is always suctorial, never
  gizzard-like. The gonadial tubes (gonocoels or gonadial coelom) are
  originally reticular and paired, though they may be reduced to a
  simpler condition. They open on the first somite of the mesosoma. In
  the numerous degenerate forms simplification occurs by obliteration of
  the demarcations of somites and the fusion of body-regions, together
  with a gradual suppression of the lamelliferous respiratory organs and
  the substitution for them of tracheae, which, in their turn, in the
  smaller and most reduced members of the group, may also disappear.

  The Eu-arachnida are divided into two grades with reference to the
  condition of the respiratory organs as adapted to aquatic or
  terrestrial life.

    Grade a (of the Eu-arachnida). DELOBRANCHIA (Hydropheustea).

  Mesosomatic segments furnished with large plate-like appendages, the
  1st pair acting as the genital operculum, the remaining pairs being
  provided with branchial lamellae fitted for breathing oxygen dissolved
  in water. The prae-genital somite partially or wholly obliterated in
  the adult. The mouth lying far back, so that the basal segments of all
  the prosomatic appendages, excepting those of the 1st pair, are
  capable of acting as masticatory organs. Lateral eyes consisting of a
  densely packed group of eye-units ("compound" eyes).

  Order 1. Xiphosura.--The prae-genital somite fuses in the embryo with
  the prosoma and disappears (see fig. 19). Not free-swimming, none of
  the prosomatic appendages modified to act as paddles; segments of the
  mesosoma and metasoma (=opisthosoma) not more than ten in number,
  distinct or coalesced.

    Family--Limulidae (_Limulus_).
      "    *Belinuridae (_Belinurus_, _Aglaspis_, _Prestwichia_).
      "    *Hemiaspidae (_Hemiaspis_, _Bunodes_).

  [Illustration: FIG. 44.--Dorsal view of _Limulus polyphemus_, Latr.

  (From Parker and Haswell, _Text book of Zoology_ after Leuckart.)]

  _Remarks_.--The Xiphosura are marine in habit, frequenting the shore.
  They are represented at the present day by the single genus _Limulus_
  (figs. 44 and 45; also figs. 7, 9, 11, to 15 and 20), often termed the
  king-crab, which occurs on the American coast of the Atlantic Ocean,
  but not on its eastern coasts, and on the Asiatic coast of the
  Pacific. The Atlantic species (_L. polyphemus_) is common on the
  coasts of the United States, and is known as the king-crab or
  horse-shoe crab. A single specimen was found in the harbour of
  Copenhagen in the 18th century, having presumably been carried over by
  a ship to which it clung.

  A species of _Limulus_ is found in the Buntersandstein of the Vosges;
  _L. Walchi_ is abundant in the Oolitic lithographic slates of Bavaria.

  [Illustration: FIG. 45.--Ventral view of _Limulus polyphemus_.

    1 to 6, The six prosomatic pairs of appendages.
    abd, the solid opisthosomatic carapace.
    tels, the post-anal spine (not the telson as the lettering would
      seem to imply, but only its post-anal portion).
    operc, the fused first pair of mesosomatic appendages forming the
      genital operculum.

  (From Parker and Haswell, _Text book of Zoology_, after Leuckart.)]

  The genera _Belinurus_, _Aglaspis_, _Prestwichia_, _Hemiaspis_ and
  _Bunodes_ consist of small forms which occur in Palaeozoic rocks. In
  none of them are the appendages known, but in the form of the two
  carapaces and the presence of free somites they are distinctly
  intermediate between _Limulus_ and the Trilobitae. The young form of
  _Limulus_ itself (fig. 40) is also similar to a Trilobite so far as
  its segmentation and trilobation are concerned. The lateral eyes of
  _Limulus_ appear to be identical in structure and position with those
  of certain Trilobitae.

  [Illustration: FIG. 46.--_Eurypterus Fischeri_, Eichwald. Silurian of
  Rootzikil. Restoration after Schmidt. The dorsal aspect is presented
  showing the prosomatic shield with paired compound eyes and the
  prosomatic appendages II. to VI. The small first pair of appendages is
  concealed from view by the carapace, 1 to 12 are the somites of the
  opisthosoma; 13, the post-anal spine.

  (From Zittel's _Text-book of Palaeontology_, The Macmillan Co, New
  York, 1896.)]

  Order 2. Gigantostraca (figs. 46, 47).--Free-swimming forms, with the
  appendages of the 6th or 5th and 6th pairs flattened or lengthened to
  act as oars; segments of mesosoma and metasoma (= opisthosoma), twelve
  in number.

  Appendages of anterior pair very large and chelate.

    Sub-order Pterygotomorpha, Pterygotidae (_Pterygotus_).

  Appendages of anterior pair minute and chelate.

                               / Stylonuridae (_Stylonurus_).
    Sub-order Eurypteromorpha <  Eurypteridae (_Eurypterus_,
                               \   _Slimonia_).

  [Illustration: From Zittel's _Palaeontology_.

  FIG. 47.--_Pterygotus osiliensis_, Schmidt. Silurian of Rootzikil.
  Restoration of the ventral surface, about a third natural size, after
  Schmidt.

    a, Camerostome or epistoma.
    m, Chilarium or metasternite of the prosoma (so-called metastoma).
    oc, The compound eyes.
    1 to 8, Segments of the sixth prosomatic appendage.
    I' to V', First five opisthosomatic somites.
    7', Sixth opisthosomatic somite.

    [Observe the powerful gnathobases of the sixth pair of prosomatic
    limbs and the median plates behind m. The dotted line on somite I
    indicates the position of the genital operculum which was probably
    provided with branchial lamellae.]]

  _Remarks._--The Gigantostraca are frequently spoken of as "the
  Eurypterines." Not more than thirty species are known. They became
  extinct in Palaeozoic times, and are chiefly found in the Upper
  Silurian, though extending upwards as far as the Carboniferous. They
  may be regarded as "macrourous" Xiphosura; that is to say, Xiphosura
  in which the nomomeristic number of eighteen well-developed somites is
  present and the posterior ones form a long tail-like region of the
  body. There still appears to be some doubt whether in the sub-order
  Eurypteromorpha the first pair of prosomatic appendages (fig. 46) is
  atrophied, or whether, if present, it has the form of a pair of
  tactile palps or of minute chelae. Though there are indications of
  lamelliform respiratory appendages on mesosomatic somites following
  that bearing the genital operculum, we cannot be said to have any
  proper knowledge as to such appendages, and further evidence with
  regard to them is much to be desired. (For literature see Zittel,
  22*.)

    Grade b (of the Eu-arachnida). EMBOLOBRANCHIA (Aeropneustea).

  In primitive forms the respiratory lamellae of the appendages of the
  3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th, or of the 1st and 2nd mesosomatic somites are
  sunk beneath the surface of the body, and become adapted to breathe
  atmospheric oxygen, forming the leaves of the so-called lung-books. In
  specialized forms these pulmonary sacs are wholly or partly replaced
  by tracheal tubes. The appendages of the mesosoma generally
  suppressed; in the more primitive forms one or two pairs may be
  retained as organs subservient to reproduction or silk-spinning. Mouth
  situated more forwards than in Delobranchia, no share in mastication
  being taken by the basal segments of the 5th and 6th pairs of
  prosomatic appendages. Lateral eyes, when present, represented by
  separate ocelli.

  The prae-genital somite, after appearing in the embryo, either is
  obliterated (_Scorpio, Galeodes, Opilio_and others) or is retained as
  a reduced narrow region of the body, the "waist," between prosoma and
  mesosoma. It is represented by a full-sized tergal plate in the
  Pseudo-scorpiones.

  Section [alpha]. _Pectinifera._--The primitive distinction between the
  mesosoma and the metasoma retained, the latter consisting of six
  somites and the former of six somites in the adult, each of which is
  furnished during growth with a pair of appendages. Including the
  prae-genital somite (fig. 16), which is suppressed in the adult, there
  are thirteen somites behind the prosoma. The appendages of the 1st and
  2nd mesosomatic somites persisting as the genital operculum and
  pectones respectively, those of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th somites (?
  in _Palaeophonus_) sinking below the surface during growth in
  connexion with the formation of the four pairs of pulmonary sacs (see
  fig. 17). Lateral eyes monostichous.

  [Illustration: Restored after Thorell's indications by R.I. Pocock.

  FIG. 48.--Dorsal view of a restoration of _Palaeophonus nuncius_,
  Thorell. The Silurian scorpion from Gothland.]

  Order 1. Scorpiones.--Prosoma covered by a single dorsal shield,
  bearing typically median and lateral eyes; its sternal elements
  reduced to a single plate lodged between or behind the basal segments
  of the 5th and 6th pairs of appendages. Appendages of 1st pair
  tri-segmented, chelate; of 2nd pair chelate, with their basal segments
  subserving mastication; of 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs similar in form
  and function, except that in recent and Carboniferous forms the basal
  segments of the 3rd and 4th are provided with sterno-coxal (maxillary)
  lobes, those of the 4th pair meeting in the middle line and underlying
  the mouth. The five posterior somites of the metasoma constricted to
  form a "tail," the post-anal sclerite persisting as a weapon of
  offence and provided with a pair of poison glands (see figs. 8, 10,
  12, 13, 14, 15, 21 and 22).

  Sub-order Apoxypoda.--The 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs of appendages
  short, stout, tapering, the segments about as wide as long, except the
  apical, which is distally slender, pointed, slightly curved, and
  without distinct movable claws.

  Family--Palaeophonidae, _Palaeophonus_ (figs. 48 and 49).

  Sub-order Dionychopoda.--The 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs of appendages
  slender, not evenly tapering, the segments longer than wide; the
  apical segment short, distally truncate, and provided with a pair of
  movable claws. Basal segments of the 5th and 6th pairs of appendages
  abutting against the sternum of the prosoma (see fig. 10 and figs. 51,
  52 and 53).

  Family--Pandinidae (_Pandinus, Opisthophthalmus, Urodacus_).
    "     Vejovidae (_Vaejovis, Jurus, Euscorpius, Broteas_).
    "     Bothriuridae (_Bothriurus, Cercophonius_).
    "     Buthidae (_Buthus, Centrums_).
    "     *Cyclophthalmidae (_Cydophthalmus_)         ( Carboniferous.
    "     *Eoscorpiidae (_Eoscorpius, Centromachus_)  (

  [Illustration: FIG. 49.--Ventral view of a restoration of
  _Palaeophonus Hunteri_, Pocock, the Silurian scorpion from Lesmahagow,
  Scotland. Restored by R.I. Pocock. The meeting of the coxae of all the
  prosomatic limbs in front of the pentagonal sternum; the space for a
  genital operculum; the pair of pectens, and the absence of any
  evidence of pulmonary stigmata are noticeable in this specimen.

  (See Pocock, _Quart Jour. Micr. Sci._, 1901.)]

  _Remarks on the Order Scorpiones._--The Scorpion is one of the great
  animals of ancient lore and tradition. It and the crab are the only
  two invertebrates which had impressed the minds of early men
  sufficiently to be raised to the dignity of astronomical
  representation. It is all the more remarkable that the scorpion proves
  to be the oldest animal form of high elaboration which has persisted
  to the present day. In the Upper Silurian two specimens of a scorpion
  have been found (figs. 48, 49), one in Gothland and one in Scotland,
  which would be recognized at once as true scorpions by a child or a
  savage. The Silurian scorpion _Palaeophonus_, differs, so far as
  obvious points are concerned, from a modern scorpion only in the
  thickness of its legs and in their terminating in strong spike-like
  joints, instead of being slight and provided with a pair of terminal
  claws. The legs of the modern scorpion (fig. 10; fig. 51) are those of
  a terrestrial Arthropod, such as a beetle; whilst those of the
  Silurian scorpion are the legs of an aquatic Arthropod, such as a crab
  or lobster. It is probable that the Silurian scorpion was an aquatic
  animal, and that its respiratory lamellae were still projecting from
  the surface of the body to serve as branchiae. No trace of "stigmata,"
  the orifices of the lung-chambers of modern scorpions, can be found in
  the Scottish specimen of _Palaeophonus_, which presents the ventral
  surface of the animal to view. On the other hand, no trace of
  respiratory appendages excepting the pectens can be detected in the
  specimen (see fig. 49).

  [Illustration: FIG. 50.--Comparison of the sixth prosomatic limb of a
  recent scorpion (B), of Palaeophonus (C), and of Limulus (A), showing
  their agreement in the number of segments; in the existence of a
  movable spine, Sp, at the distal border of the fifth segment; in the
  correspondence of the two claws at the free end of the limb of Scorpio
  with two spines similarly placed in Limulus; and, lastly, in the
  correspondence of the three talon-like spines carried on the distal
  margin of segment six of recent scorpions with the four larger but
  similarly situated spines on the leg of Limulus; s, groove dividing
  the ankylosed segments 4 and 5 of the Limulus leg into two.

  (After Pocock, _Q. J. Mic. Sci._, 1901.)]

  [Illustration: From Lankester, _Journ. Linn. Soc. Zool_. vol. xvi.,
  1881.

  FIG. 51.--Drawing from life of the desert scorpion, _Buthusaustralis_,
  Lin., from Biskra, N. Africa.]

  Fossil scorpions of the modern type are found in the Coal Measures. At
  the present day scorpions of various genera are found in all the warm
  regions of the world. In Europe they occur as far north as Bavaria and
  the south of France. The largest species measure 9 in. from the front
  of the head to the end of the sting, and occur in tropical India and
  Africa. Between 200 and 300 species are known. The scorpions use their
  large chelae for seizing prey and for fighting with one another. They
  never use the sting when (as frequently happens) they attack another
  scorpion, because, as was ascertained by A.G. Bourne (24), the poison
  exuded by the sting has no injurious effect on another scorpion nor on
  the scorpion itself. The stories of a scorpion stinging itself to
  death when placed in a circle of burning coals are due to erroneous
  observation. When placed in such a position the scorpion faints and
  becomes inert. It is found (Bourne, 24) that some species of scorpion
  faint at a temperature of 40° Cent. They recover on being removed to
  cooler conditions. A scorpion having seized its prey (usually a large
  insect, or small reptile or mammal) with the large chelae brings its
  tail over its head, and deliberately punctures the struggling victim
  twice with its sting (fig. 52). The poison of the sting is similar to
  snake-poison (Calmette), and rapidly paralyses animals which are not
  immune to it. It is probably only sickly adults or young children of
  the human race who can be actually killed by a scorpion's sting. When
  the scorpion has paralysed its prey in this way, the two short
  chelicerae are brought into play (fig. 53). By the crushing action of
  their pincers, and an alternate backward and forward movement, they
  bring the soft blood-holding tissues of the victim close to the minute
  pin-hole aperture which is the scorpion's mouth. The muscles acting on
  the bulb-like pharynx now set up a pumping action (see Huxley, 26);
  and the juices--but no solid matter, excepting such as is reduced to
  powder--are sucked into the scorpion's alimentary canal. A scorpion
  appears to prefer for its food another scorpion, and will suck out the
  juices of an individual as large as itself. When this has taken place,
  the gorged scorpion becomes distended and tense in the mesosomatic
  region. It is certain that the absorbed juices do not occupy the
  alimentary canal alone, but pass also into its caecal off-sets which
  are the ducts of the gastric glands (see fig. 33).

  [Illustration: From Lankester, _Journ. Linn. Soc._

  FIG. 52.--Drawing from life of the Italian scorpion _Euscorpius
  italicus_, Herbst, holding a blue-bottle fly with its left chela, and
  carefully piercing it between head and thorax with its sting. Two
  insertions of the sting are effected and the fly is instantly
  paralysed by the poison so introduced into its body.]

  [Illustration: From Lankester, _Journ. Linn. Soc._

  FIG. 53.--The same scorpion carrying the now paralysed fly held in its
  chelicerae, the chelae liberated for attack and defence. Drawn from
  life.]

  All Arachnida, including _Limulus_, feed by suctorial action in
  essentially the same way as _Scorpio_.

  Scorpions of various species have been observed to make a hissing
  noise when disturbed, or even when not disturbed. The sound is
  produced by stridulating organs developed on the basal joints of the
  limbs, which differ in position and character in different genera (see
  Pocock, 27). Scorpions copulate with the ventral surfaces in contact.
  The eggs are fertilized, practically in the ovary, and develop _in
  situ_. The young are born fully formed and are carried by the mother
  on her back. As many as thirty have been counted in a brood. For
  information as to the embryology of scorpions, the reader is referred
  to the works named in the bibliography below. Scorpions do not possess
  spinning organs nor form either snares or nests, so far as is known.
  But some species inhabiting sandy deserts form extensive burrows. The
  fifth pair of prosomatic appendages is used by these scorpions when
  burrowing, to kick back the sand as the burrow is excavated by the
  great chelae.

  References to works dealing with the taxonomy and geographical
  distribution of scorpions are given at the end of this article (28).

  Section [beta]. _Epectinata._--The primitive distinction between the
  mesosoma and the metasoma wholly or almost wholly obliterated, the two
  regions uniting to form an opisthosoma, which never consists of more
  than twelve somites and never bears appendages or breathing-organs
  behind the 4th somite. The breathing-organs of the opisthosoma, when
  present, represented by two pairs of stigmata, opening either upon the
  1st and 2nd (Pedipalpi) or the 2nd and 3rd somites (Solifugae,
  Pseudo-scorpiones), or by a single pair upon the 3rd (? 2nd) somite
  (Opiliones) of the opisthosoma, there being rarely an additional
  stigma on the 4th (some Solifugae). The appendages of the 2nd somite
  of the opisthosoma absent, rarely minute and bud-like (some
  Amblypygi), never pectiniform. A prae-genital somite is often present
  either in a reduced condition forming a waist (Pedipalpi, Araneae,
  Palpigradi) or as a full-sized tergal plate (Pseudo-scorpiones); in
  some it is entirely atrophied (Solifugae, Holosomata, and
  Rhynchostomi). Lateral eyes when present diplostichous.

  _Remarks._--The Epectinate Arachnids do not stand so close to the
  aquatic ancestors of the Embolobranchia as do the Pectiniferous
  scorpions. At the same time we are not justified in supposing that the
  scorpions stand in any way as an intermediate grade between any of the
  existing Epectinata and the Delobranchia. It is probable that the
  Pedipalpi, Araneae, and Podogona have been separately evolved as
  distinct lines of descent from the ancient aquatic Arachnida. The
  Holosomata and Rhynchostomi are probably offshoots from the stem of
  the Araneae, and it is not unlikely (in view of the structure of the
  prosomatic somites of the Tartarides) that the Solifugae are connected
  in origin with the Pedipalpi. The appearance of tracheae in place of
  lung-sacs cannot be regarded as a starting-point for a new line of
  descent comprising all the tracheate forms; tracheae seem to have
  developed independently in different lines of descent. On the whole,
  the Epectinata are highly specialized and degenerate forms, though
  there are few, if any, animals which surpass the spiders in rapidity
  of movement, deadliness of attack and constructive instincts.

  [Illustration: From Lankester, _Q. J. Mic. Sci._ N.S. _vol_. xxi.,
  1881.

  FIG. 54.--_Thelyphonus_, one of the Pedipalpi.

    A, Ventral view.
    I, Chelicera (detached).
    II, Chelae.
    III, Palpiform limb.
    IV to VI, The walking legs.
    stc, Sterno-coxal process (gnathobase) of the chelae.
    st^1, Anterior sternal plate of the prosoma.
    st^2, Posterior sternal plate of the prosoma.
    pregen, Position of the prae-genital somite (not seen).
    l, l, Position of the two pulmonary sacs of the right side.
    1 to 11, Somites of the opisthosoma (mesosoma plus metasoma).
    msg, Stigmata of the tergo-sternal muscles.
    an, Anus.
    B, Dorsal view of the opisthosoma of the same.
    pregen, The prae-genital somite.
    p, The tergal stigmata of the tergo-sternal muscles.
    paf, Post-anal segmented filament corresponding to the post-anal
      spine of Limulus.]

  Order 2. Pedipalpi (figs. 54 to 59).--Appendages of 1st pair
  bisegmented, without poison gland; of 2nd pair prehensile, their basal
  segments underlying the proboscis, and furnished with sterno-coxal
  (maxillary) process, the apical segment tipped with a single movable
  or immovable claw; appendages of 3rd pair different from the
  remainder, tactile in function, with at least the apical segment
  many-jointed and clawless. The ventral surface of the prosoma bears
  prosternal, metasternal and usually mesosternal chitine-plates (fig.
  55). A narrow prae-genital somite is present between opisthosoma and
  prosoma (figs. 55, 57). Opisthosoma consisting of eleven somites,
  almost wholly without visible appendages. Intromittent organ of male
  beneath the genital operculum (=sternum of the 1st somite of
  opisthosoma).

  [Illustration: FIG. 55.--_Thelyphonus sp_. Ventral view of the
  anterior portion of the body to show the three prosomatic sternal
  plates a, b, c, and the rudimentary sternal element of the
  prae-genital somite; opisth 1, first somite of the opisthosoma.

  (From a drawing made by Pickard - Cambridge, under the direction of
  R.I. Pocock.)]

  _Note._--The possibility of another interpretation of the anterior
  somites of the mesosoma and the prae-genital somite must be borne in
  mind. Possibly, though not probably, the somites carrying the two
  lung-sacs correspond to the first two lung-bearing somites of
  _Scorpio_, and it is the genital opening which has shifted. The same
  caution applies in the case of the Araneae. Excalation of one or of
  two anterior mesosomatic somites, besides the prae-genital somite,
  would then have to be supposed to have occurred also.

  Sub-order a. Uropygi.--Prosoma longer than wide, its sternal area very
  narrow, furnished with a large prosternal and metasternal plate, and
  often with a small mesosternal sclerite. Appendages of 2nd pair with
  their basal segments united in the middle line and incapable of
  lateral movement; appendages of 3rd pair with only the apical segment
  many-jointed. Opisthosoma without trace of appendages; its posterior
  somites narrowed to form a movable tail for the support of the
  post-anal sclerite, which has no poison glands.

  [Illustration: FIG. 56.--_Thelyphonus assamensis_ [male]. Ventral
  surface of the anterior region of the opisthosoma, the first somite
  being pushed upwards and forwards so as to expose the subjacent
  structures. _opistho_ 1, First somite of the opisthosoma; opistho 2,
  second do.; g, genital aperture; l, edges of the lamellae of the
  lung-books; m, stigmata of tergo-sternal muscles.

  (Original drawing by Pocock.)]

  Tribe 1. Urotricha.--Dorsal area of prosoma covered with a single
  shield (? two in _Geralinura_), bearing median and lateral eyes.
  Post-anal sclerite modified as a long, many-jointed feeler. Appendages
  of 2nd pair folding in a horizontal plane, completely chelate, the
  claw immovably united to the sixth segment. Respiratory organs present
  in the form of pulmonary sacs.

    Family--Thelyphonidae (_Thelyphonus_ (fig. 54), _Hypoctonus_,
    *_Geralinura_).

  Tribe 2. Tartarides.--Small degenerate forms with the dorsal area of
  the prosoma furnished with two shields, a larger in front covering the
  anterior four somites, and a smaller behind covering the 5th and 6th
  somites; the latter generally subdivided into a right and left
  portion. There is also a pair of narrow tergal sclerites interposed
  between the anterior and posterior shields. Eyes evanescent or absent.
  Appendages of 2nd pair folding in a vertical plane, not chelate, the
  claw long and movable. Post-anal sclerite short and undivided. No
  distinct respiratory stigmata behind the sterna of the 1st and 2nd
  somites of the opisthosoma.

    Family--Hubbardiidae (_Schizomus_, _Hubbardia_) (figs. 57-59).

  [Illustration: FIG. 57.--_Schizomus crassicaudatus_, one of the
  Tartarid Pedipalpi. Ventral view of a female with the appendages cut
  short near the base.

    a, Prosternum of prosoma.
    b, Metasternum of prosoma.
    prae-gen, The prae-genital somite.
    I opisth, First somite of the opisthosoma.
    II opisth, Eleventh somite of the opisthosoma.
    pa, Post-anal lobe of the female (compare the jointed filament in
      _Thelyphonus_, fig. 54).

  (Original drawing by Pickard-Cambridge, directed by Pocock.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 58.--_Schizomus crassicaudatus_, a Tartarid
  Pedipalp. Dorsal view of a male with the appendages cut short.

    I to VI. The prosomatic appendages.
    a, Anterior plate.
    b, Posterior plate of the prosomatic carapace.
    prae-gen, Tergum of the prae-genital somite.
    11, The eleventh somite of the opisthosoma.
    pa, Post-anal lobe of the male--a conical body with narrow basal
      stalk.

  (Original as preceding.)]

  Sub-order b. Amblypygi.--Prosoma wider than long, covered above by a
  single shield bearing median and lateral eyes, which have
  diplostichous ommatea. Sternal area broad, with prosternal, two
  mesosternal, and metasternal plates, the prosternum projecting
  forwards beneath the coxae of the 2nd pair of appendages. Appendages
  of 2nd pair folding in a horizontal plane; their basal segments
  freely movable; claw free or fused; basal segments of 4th and 5th
  pairs widely separated by the sternal area; appendages of 3rd pair
  with all the segments except the proximal three, forming a
  many-jointed flagellum. Opisthosoma without post-anal sclerite and
  posterior caudal elongation: with frequently a pair of small lobate
  appendages on the sternum of the 3rd somite. Respiratory organs, as in
  Urotricha.

    Family --  Phrynichidae (_Phrynichus_, _Damon_).
      "        Admetidae (_Admetus_, _Heterophrynus_).
      "        Charontidae (_Charon_, _Sarax_).
    (Family ?)--*_Graeophonus_.

  [Illustration: FIG. 59.--_Schizomus crassicaudatus_, one of the
  Pedipalpi. Lateral view of a male. II to VI, the prosomatic
  appendages, the first being concealed (see fig. 58); 5, the fifth, and
  11, the eleventh tergites of the opisthosoma; pa, the conical
  post-anal lobe.

  (Original as preceding.)]

  _Remarks._--The Pedipalpi are confined to the tropics and warmer
  temperate regions of both hemispheres. Fossil forms occur in the
  Carboniferous. The small forms known as _Schizomus_ and _Hubbardia_
  are of special interest from a morphological point of view. The
  Pedipalpi have no poison glands. (Reference to literature (29).)

  [Illustration: FIG. 60.--_Liphistius desultor_, Schiödte, one of the
  Araneae Mesothelae. Dorsal view. I to VI, the prosomatic appendages;
  4, 5, 6, the fourth, fifth and sixth tergites of the opisthosoma.
  Between the bases of the sixth pair of limbs and behind the prosomatic
  carapace is seen the tergite of the small prae-genital somite.

  (Original by Pickard-Cambridge and Pocock.)]

  Order 3. Araneae (figs. 60 to 64.).--Prosoma covered with a single
  shield and typically furnished with median and lateral eyes of
  diplostichous structure, as in the Amblypygi. The sternal surface
  wide, continuously chitinized, but with prosternal and metasternal
  elements generally distinguishable at the anterior and posterior ends
  respectively of the large mesosternurm. Prosternum underlying the
  proboscis. Appendages of 1st pair have two segments, as in Pedipalpi,
  but are furnished with poison gland, and are retroverts. Appendages of
  2nd pair not underlying the mouth, but freely movable and, except in
  primitive forms, furnished with a maxillary lobe; the rest of the limb
  like the legs, tipped with a single claw and quite unmodified (except
  in [symbol: male]). Remaining pairs of appendages similar in form and
  function, each tipped with two or three claws. Opisthosoma when
  segmented showing the same number of somites as in the Pedipalpi;
  usually unsegmented, the prae-genital somite constricted to form the
  waist; the appendages of its 3rd and 4th somites retained as spinning
  mammillae. Respiratory organs (see fig. 63, _stg_), as in the
  Amblypygi, or with the posterior pair, rarely the anterior pair as
  well, replaced by tracheal tubes. Intromittent organ of male in the
  apical segment of the 2nd prosomatic appendage.

  [Illustration: FIG. 61.--_Liphistius desultor_. Ventral view with the
  prosomatic appendages cut short excepting the chelicerae (i) whose
  sharp retroverts are seen. Between the bases of the prosomatic limbs
  an anterior and a posterior sternal plate (black) are seen. 1, The
  sternum of the first opisthosomatic or genital somite covering the
  genital aperture and the first pair of lung-sacs. In front of it the
  narrow waist is formed by the soft sternal area of the praegenital
  somite; 2, the sternite of the second opisthosomatic somite covering
  the posterior pair of lung-sacs; 3 and 4, the spinning appendages
  (limbs) of the opisthosoma; a, inner, b, outer ramus of the appendage;
  ii, sternite of the eleventh somite of the opisthosoma: in front of it
  other rudimentary sternites; an, anus.

  (Original as above.)]

  Sub-order a. Mesothelae (see figs. 60 to 62).--Opisthosoma distinctly
  segmented, furnished with 11 tergal plates, as in the Amblypygi; the
  ventral surface of the 1st and 2nd somites with large sternal plates,
  covering the genital aperture and the two pairs of pulmonary sacs, the
  sternal plates from the 6th to the 11th somites represented by
  integumental ridges, weakly chitinized in the middle. The two pairs of
  spinning appendages retain their primitive position in the middle of
  the lower surface of the opisthosoma far in advance of the anus on the
  3rd and 4th somites, each appendage consisting of a stout,
  many-jointed outer branch and a slender, unsegmented inner branch.
  Prosoma as in the Mygalomorphae, except that the mesosternal area is
  long and narrow.

    Family--Liphistiidae (_Liphistius_, *_Arthrolycosa_).

  Sub-order b. Opisthothelae (see fig. 63).--Opisthosoma without trace
  of separate terga and sterna, the segmentation merely represented
  posteriorly by slight integumental folds and the sterna of the 1st and
  2nd somites by the opercular plates of the pulmonary sacs. The
  spinning appendages migrate to the posterior end of the opisthosoma
  and take up a position close to the anus; the inner branches of the
  anterior pair either atrophy or are represented homogenetically by a
  plate, the cribellum, or by an undivided membranous lobe, the colulus.

  Tribe 1. Mygalomorphae.--The plane of the articulation of the
  appendages of the 1st pair to the prosoma (the retrovert) vertical,
  the basal segment projecting straight forwards at its proximal end,
  the distal segment or fang closing backwards in a direction
  subparallel to the long axis of the body. Two pairs of pulmonary sacs.

  Families--Theraphosidae (_Avicularia_, _Poecilotheria_). Barychelidae
  (_Barychelus_, _Plagiobothrus_). Dipluridae (_Diplura_, _Macrothele_).
  Ctenizidae (_Cteniza_, _Nemesia_). Atypidae (_Atypus_, _Calommata_).

  [Illustration: FIG. 62.--_Liphistius desultor_. Lateral view.

    I to VI, Appendages of the prosoma cut off at the base.
    o, Ocular tubercle.
    praegen, The prae-genital somite.
    1 and 2, Sternites of the first and second opisthosomatic somites.
    3 and 4, Appendages of the third and fourth opisthosomatic somites,
      which are the spinning organs, and in this genus occupy their
      primitive position instead of migrating to the anal region as in
      other spiders.
    5, Tergite of the fifth opisthosomatic somite.
    11, Eleventh opisthosomatic somite; an, Anus.

  (Original.)]

  Tribe 2. Arachnomorpnae.--The plane of the articulation of the
  appendages of the 1st pair to the prosoma horizontal, the basal
  segment projecting vertically downwards, at least at its proximal end,
  the distal segment or fang closing inwards nearly or quite at right
  angles to the long axis of the body. The posterior pulmonary sacs
  (except in _Hypochilus_) replaced by tracheal tubes; the anterior and
  posterior pairs replaced by tracheal tubes in the Caponiidae.

  Principal families--Hypochilidae (_Hypochilus_). Dysderidae
  (_Dysdera_, _Segestria_). Caponiidae (_Caponia_, _Nops_). Filistatidae
  (_Filistata_). Uloboridae (_Uloborus_, _Dinopis_). Argiapidae
  (_Nephila_, _Gasteracantha_). Pholcidae (_Pholcus_, _Artema_).
  Agelenidae (_Tegenuria_). Lycosidae (_Lycosa_). Clubionidae
  (_Clubiona_, _Olios_, _Sparassus_) Gnaphosidae (_Gnaphosa_,
  _Hemiclaea_). Thomisidae (_Thomisus_). Attidae (_Salticus_).
  Urocteidae (_Uroctea_). Eresidae (_Eresus_).

  _Remarks on the Araneae._--The Spiders are the most numerous and
  diversified group of the Arachnida; about 2000 species are known. No
  noteworthy fossil spiders are known; the best-preserved are in amber
  of Oligocene age. _Protolycosa_ and _Arthrolycosa_ occur in the
  Carboniferous. Morphologically, the spiders are remarkable for the
  concentration and specialization of their structure, which is
  accompanied with high physiological efficiency. The larger species of
  Bird's Nest Spiders (_Avicularia_), the opisthosoma of which is as
  large as a bantam's egg, undoubtedly attack young birds, and M'Cook
  gives an account of the capture in its web by an ordinary house spider
  of a small mouse. The "retrovert" or bent-back first pair of
  appendages is provided with a poison gland opening on the fang or
  terminal segment. Spiders form at least two kinds of
  constructions--snares for the capture of prey and nests for the
  preservation of the young. The latter are only formed by the female,
  which is a larger and more powerful animal than the male. Like the
  scorpions the spiders have a special tendency to cannibalism, and
  accordingly the male, in approaching the female for the purpose of
  fertilizing her, is liable to be fallen upon and sucked dry by the
  object of his attentions. The sperm is removed by the male from the
  genital aperture into a special receptacle on the terminal segment of
  the 2nd prosomatic appendage. Thus held out at some distance from the
  body, it is cautiously advanced by the male spider to the genital
  aperture of the female.

  [Illustration: FIG. 63.--Ventral view of a male mygalomorphous spider.

    I to VI, The six pairs of prosomatic appendages.
    a, Copulatory apparatus of the second appendage.
    b, Process of the fifth joint of the third appendage.
    M, Mouth.
    pro, Prosternite of the prosoma.
    mes, Mesosternite of the prosoma: observe the contact of the coxae
      of the sixth pair of limbs behind it; compare _Liphistius_ (fig.
      61) where this does not occur.
    stg, Lung aperture.
    gn, Genital aperture.
    a, Anus with a pair of backwardly migrated spinning appendages on
      each side of it; compare the position of these appendages in
      _Liphistius_ (fig. 61).

  (From Lankester, "Limulus an Arachnid.")]

  [Illustration: FIG. 64.--_Liphistius desultor_. Under side of the
  uplifted genital or first opisthosomatic somite of the female; g,
  genital aperture; p, pitted plate, probably a gland for the secretion
  of adhesive material for the eggs; l, the edges of the lamellae of the
  lung-books of the first pair.

  (Original drawing by Pocock.)]

  For an account of the courtship and dancing of spiders, of their webs
  and floating lines, the reader is referred to the works of M'Cook (30)
  and the Peckhams (31), whilst an excellent account of the nests of
  trap-door spiders is given by Moggridge (32). References to systematic
  works will also be found at the end of this article (33).

  Order 4. Palpigradi = Microthelyphonidae (see fig. 65).--Prosoma
  covered above by three plates, a larger representing the dorsal
  elements of the first four somites, and two smaller representing the
  dorsal elements of the 5th and 6th.

  Its ventral surface provided with one prosternal, two mesosternal and
  one metasternal plate. Appendages of 1st pair consisting of three
  segments, completely chelate, without poison gland; of 2nd pair
  slender, leg-like, tipped with three claws, the basal segment without
  sterno-coxal process taking no share in mastication, and widely
  separated from its fellow of the opposite side; 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th
  appendages similar in form to the 2nd and to each other.

  Proboscis free, not supported from below by either the prosternum or
  the basal segments of the appendages of the 2nd pair.

  [Illustration: FIG. 65.--_Koenenia mirabilis_, Grassi, one of the
  Palpigradi.

    A, Ventral view of prosoma and anterior region of opisthosoma with
      the appendages cut off near the base; a and b, prosternites; c,
      mesosternite; and d, metasternite of the prosoma; f, ventral
      surface of the prae-genital somite; g, sternite of the genital
      somite (first opisthosomatic somite).
    B, Dorsal view. I to VI, prosomatic appendages; 1 opisth, genital
      somite (first opisthosomatic somite).
    C, Lateral view, I to VI, prosomatic appendages; a, b, c, the three
      tergal plates of the prosoma; prae-gen, the prae-genital somite; 1
      to 10, the ten somites of the opisthosoma.
    D, Chelicera.

  (Original drawing by Pocock and Pickard-Cambridge, after Hansen and
  Sörensen.)]

  Opisthosoma consisting of only ten somites, which have no tergal and
  sternal elements, the prae-genital somite contracted to form a
  "waist," as in the Pedipalpi; the last three narrowed to form a caudal
  support for the many-jointed flagelliform telson, as in the Urotricha.
  Respiratory organs atrophied.

    Family--Koeneniidae (_Koenenia_).

  _Remarks._--An extremely remarkable minute form originally described
  by Grassi (34) from Sicily, and since further described by Hansen
  (35). Recently the genus has been found in Texas, U.S.A. Only one
  genus of the order is known.

  Order 5. Solifugae = Mycetophorae (see figs. 66 to 69).--Dorsal area
  of prosoma covered with three distinct plates, two smaller
  representing the terga of the 5th and 6th somites, and a larger
  representing those of the anterior four somites, although the reduced
  terga of the 3rd and 4th are traceable behind the larger plate. The
  latter bears a pair of median eyes and obsolete lateral eyes on each
  side. Sternal elements of prosoma almost entirely absent, traces of a
  prosternum and metasternum alone remaining. Rostrum free, not
  supported by either the prosternum or the basal segments of the
  appendages. Appendages of 1st pair large, chelate, bisegmented,
  articulated to the sides of the head-shield; appendages of 2nd pair
  simple, pediform, with protrusible (? suctorial) organ, and no claws
  at the tip; their basal segments united in the middle line and
  furnished with sterno-coxal process. Remaining pairs of appendages
  with their basal segments immovably fixed to the sternal surface,
  similar in form, the posterior three pairs furnished with two claws
  supported on long stalks; the basal segments of the 6th pair bearing
  five pairs of tactile sensory organs or malleoli. The prae-genital
  somite is suppressed. Opisthosoma composed of ten somites. Respiratory
  organs tracheal, opening upon the ventral surface of the 2nd and 3rd,
  and sometimes also of the 4th somite of the opisthosoma. A
  supplementary pair of tracheae opening behind the basal segment of the
  4th appendage of the prosoma.

  (? Intromittent organ of male lodged on the dorsal side of the 1st
  pair of prosomatic appendages.)

  Families--Hexisopodidae (_Hexisopus_). Solpugidae (_Solpuga_,
  _Rhagodes_). Galeodidae (_Galeodes_).

  _Remarks._--These most strange-looking Arachnids occur in warmer
  temperate, and tropical regions of Asia, Africa and America. Their
  anatomy has not been studied, as yet, by means of freshly-killed
  material, and is imperfectly known, though the presence of the coxal
  glands was determined by Macleod in 1884. The proportionately enormous
  chelae (chelicerae) of the first pair of appendages are not provided
  with poison glands; their bite is not venomous.

  [Illustration: FIG. 66.--_Galeodes sp._, one of the Solifugae. Ventral
  view to show legs and somites.

    I to VI, The six leg-bearing somites of the prosoma.
    opisth 1, First or genital somite of the opisthosoma.
    ge, Site of the genital aperture.
    st, Thoracic tracheal aperture.
    l^2, Anterior tracheal aperture of the opisthosoma in somite 2 of the
      opisthosoma.
    l^3, Tracheal aperture in somite 3 of the opisthosoma.
    a, Anus.

  (From Lankester, "Limulus an Arachnid.")]

  [Illustration: FIG. 67.--_Galeodes sp._, one of the Solifugae. Ventral
  view with the appendages cut off at the base.

    I to VI, Prosomatic appendages.
    s, Prosomatic stigma or aperture of the tracheal system.
    1, First opisthosomatic sternite covering the genital aperture g.
    2, Second opisthosomatic sternite covering the second pair of
      tracheal apertures sp1.
    sp2, The third pair of tracheal apertures.
    10, The tenth opisthosomatic somite.
    an, The anal aperture.

  (Original by Pickard-Cambridge and Pocock.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 68.--_Galeodes sp._, one of the Solifugae. Dorsal
  view.

    I to VI, Bases of the prosomatic appendages.
    o, Eyes.
    a, Lateral region of the cephalic plate to which the first pair of
      appendages are articulated.
    b, Cephalic plate with median eye.
    c, Dorsal element of somites bearing third and fourth pairs of
      appendages.
    d, Second plate of the prosoma with fifth pair of appendages.
    e, Third or hindermost plate of the prosoma beneath which the sixth
      pair of legs is articulated.
    1, 2, 9, 10, First, second, ninth and tenth somites of the
      opisthosoma.
    an, Anus.

  (Original.)]

  _Galeodes_ has been made the means of a comparison between the
  structure of the Arachnida and Hexapod insects by Haeckel and other
  writers, and it was at one time suggested that there was a genetic
  affinity between the two groups--through _Galeodes_, or extinct forms
  similar to it. The segmentation of the prosoma and the form of the
  appendages bear a homoplastic similarity to the head, pro-, meso-, and
  meta-thorax of a Hexapod with mandibles, maxillary palps and three
  pairs of walking legs; while the opisthosoma agrees in form and number
  of somites with the abdomen of a Hexapod, and the tracheal stigmata
  present certain agreements in the two cases. Reference to literature
  (36).

  [Illustration: FIG. 69.--_Galeodes sp._, one of the Solifugae.

    I to VI, The six prosomatic limbs cut short.
    o, The eyes.
    b, c, Demarcated areae of the cephalic or first prosomatic plate
      corresponding respectively to appendages I, II, III, and to
      appendage IV (see fig. 68).
    d, Second plate of the prosoma-carrying appendage V.
    e, Third plate of the prosoma-carrying appendage VI. The prae-genital
      somite is absent.
    1, First somite of the opisthosoma.
    2, Second do.
    S, Prosomatic tracheal aperture between legs IV and V.
    S' and S", Opisthosomatic tracheal apertures.
    10, Tenth opisthosomatic somite.
    an, Anus.

  (Original.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 70.--_Garypus litoralis_, one of the
  Pseudoscorpiones. Ventral view.

    I to VI, Prosomatic appendages.
    o, Sterno-coxal process of the basal segment of the second appendage.
    1, Sternite of the genital or first opisthosomatic somite; the
      prae-genital somite, though represented by a tergum, has no
      separate ternal plate.
    2 and 3, Sternites of the second and third somites of the
      opisthosoma, each showing a tracheal stigma.
    10 and 11, Sternites of the tenth and eleventh somites of the
      opisthosoma.
    an, Anus.

  (Original by Pocock and Pickard-Cambridge.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 71.--_Garypus litoralis_, one of the
  Pseudoscorpiones. Dorsal view.

    I to VI, The prosomatic appendages.
    o, Eyes.
    prae-gen, Prae-genital somite.
    1, Tergite of the genital or first opisthosomatic somite.
    10, Tergite of the tenthsomite of the opisthosoma.
    11, The evanescent eleventh somite of the opisthosoma.
    an, Anus.

  (Original.)]

  Order 6. Pseudoscorpiones = Chelonethi, also called Chernetidia (see
  figs. 70, 71, 72).--Prosoma covered by a single dorsal shield, at most
  furnished with one or two diplostichous lateral eyes; sternal elements
  obliterated or almost obliterated. Appendages of the 1st pair
  bisegmented completely chelate, furnished with peculiar organs, the
  _serrula_ and the _lamina_. Appendages of 2nd pair very large and
  completely chelate, their basal segments meeting in the middle line,
  as in the Uropygi, and provided in front with membranous lip-like
  processes underlying the proboscis. Appendages of the 3rd, 4th, 5th
  and 6th pairs similar in form and function, tipped with two claws,
  their basal segments in contact in the median ventral line. The
  prae-genital somite wide, not constricted, with large tergal plate,
  but with its sternal plate small or inconspicuous. Opisthosoma
  composed, at least in many cases, of eleven somites, the 11th somite
  very small, often hidden within the both. Respiratory organs in the
  form of tracheal tubes opening by a pair of stigmata in the 2nd and
  3rd somites of the opisthosoma. Intromittent organ of male beneath
  sternum of the 1st somite of the opisthosoma.

  Sub-order a. Panctenodactyli.--Dorsal plate of prosoma (carapace)
  narrowed in front; the appendages of the 1st pair small, much
  narrower, taken together, than the posterior border of the carapace.
  Serrula on movable digit of appendages of 1st pair fixed throughout
  its length, and broader at its proximal than at its distal end; the
  immovable digit with an external process.

    Family--Cheliferidae (_Chelifer_ (figs. 70, 71, 72), _Chiridium_).
       "    Garypidae (_Garypus_).

  [Illustration: FIG. 72.--_Garypus litoralis_, one of the
  Pseudoscorpiones. Lateral view.

    I to VI, of the six prosomatic appendages.
    o, Eyes.
    prae-gen, Tergite of the prae-genital somite.
    1, Genital or first opisthosomatic somite.
    2, 3, 10, The second, third and tenth somites of the opisthosoma.
    11, The minute eleventh somite;
    an, the anus.

  (Original.)]

  Sub-order b. Hemictenodactyli.--Dorsal plate of prosoma scarcely
  narrowed in front; the appendages of the 1st pair large, not much
  narrower, taken together, than the posterior border of the carapace.
  The serrula or the movable digit free at its distal end, narrowed at
  the base; no external lamina on the immovable digit.

    Family--Obisiidae (_Obisium, Pseudobisium_).
       "    Chthoniidae (_Chthonius, Tridenchthonius_).

  _Remarks._--The book-scorpions--so called because they were, in old
  times, found not unfrequently in libraries--are found in rotten wood
  and under stones. The similarity of the form of their appendages to
  those of the scorpions suggests that they are a degenerate group
  derived from the latter, but the large size of the prae-genital somite
  in them would indicate a connexion with forms preceding the scorpions.
  Reference to literature (37).

  [Illustration: FIG. 73.--_Cryptostemma Karschii_, one of the Podogona.
  Dorsal view of male.

    III to VI, The third, fourth, fifth and sixth appendages of the
      prosoma.
    a, Movable (hinged) sclerite (so-called hood) overhanging the first
      pair of appendages.
    b, Fused terga of the prosoma followed by the opisthosoma of four
      visible somites.
    an, Orifice within which the caudal segments are withdrawn.
    E, Extremity of the fifth appendage of the male modified to subserve
      copulation.

  (Original drawing by Pocock and Pickard-Cambridge.)]

  Order 7. Podogona = Ricinulei (see figs. 73 to 76).--Dorsal area of
  prosoma furnished with two shields, a larger behind representing,
  probably, the tergal elements of the somites, and a smaller in front,
  which is freely articulated to the former and folds over the
  appendages of the 1st pair. Ventral area without distinct sternal
  plates. Appendages of 1st pair, bisegmented, completely chelate.
  Appendages of 2nd pair, with their basal segments uniting in the
  middle line below the mouth, weakly chelate at apex. Appendages of
  3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs similar in form; their basal segments in
  contact in the middle line and immovably welded, except those of the
  3rd pair, which have been pushed aside so that the bases of the 2nd
  and 4th pairs are in contact with each other. A movable membranous
  joint between the prosoma and the opisthosoma, the generative aperture
  opening upon the ventral side of the membrane. Prae-genital somite
  suppressed; the opisthosma consisting of nine segments, whereof the
  first and second are almost suppressed and concealed within the joint
  between the prosoma and the opisthosoma; the following four large and
  manifest, and the remaining three minute and forming a slender
  generally-retracted tail like that of _Thelyphonus_. Respiratory
  organs tracheal, opening by a pair of spiracles in the prosoma above
  the base of the fifth appendage on each side. Intromittent organ of
  male placed at the distal end of the appendage of the 5th pair.

  [Illustration: FIG. 74.--_Cryptostemma Karschii_, anterior aspect of
  the prosoma with the "hood" removed. I to IV, first to fourth
  appendages of the prosoma; a, basal segment of the second pair of
  appendages meeting its fellow in the middle line (see fig. 75).

  (Original drawing by Pocock and Pickard-Cambridge.)]

    Family--Cryptostemmidae (_Cryptostemma, Poliochera_), Carboniferous.

  _Remarks on the Podogona._--The name given to this small but
  remarkable group has reference to the position of the male
  intromittent organ (fig. 73, E). They are small degenerate animals
  with a relatively firm integument. Not more than four species and
  twice that number of specimens are known. They have been found in West
  Africa and South America. A fact of special interest in regard to them
  is that the genus Poliochera, from the Coal Measures, appears to be a
  member of the same group. The name Cryptostemma, given to the
  first-known genus of the order, described by Guérin-Méneville, refers
  to the supposed concealment of the eyes by the movable cephalic
  sclerite. Reference to literature (38).

  [Illustration: FIG. 75.--_Cryptostemma Karschii_, one of the Podogona.
  Ventral view.

    I to VI, The six pairs of appendages of the prosoma, the last three
      cut short.
    1, 2, 3, 4, The four somites of the opisthosoma.
    a, Visible hood overhanging the first pair of appendages.
    b, Position of the genital orifice.
    c, Part of 3rd appendage.
    d, Fourth segment of 2nd appendage. Observe that the basal segment
      of appendage III does _not_ meet its fellow in the middle line.

  (Original drawing by Pocock and Pickard-Cambridge.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 76.--_Cryptostemma Karschii_. Extremity of the
  fifth pair of appendages of the female for comparison with that of the
  male E in fig. 73.]

  Order 8. Opilione (see fig. 77).--Dorsal area of prosoma covered by a
  single shield usually bearing a pair of eyes. Sternal elements much
  reduced. Appendages of 1st pair large, three segmented and completely
  chelate; of 2nd pair either simple and pediform, or prehensile and
  subchelate; of remaining four pairs, similar in form, ambulatory in
  function; the basal segment of the 2nd, 3rd and sometimes of the 4th
  pairs of appendages furnished with sterno-coxal (maxillary) lobe.
  Opisthosoma confluent throughout its breadth with the prosoma, with
  the dorsal plate of which its anterior tergal plates are more or less
  fused; at most ten opisthosomatic somites traceable; the generative
  aperture thrust far forwards between the basal segments of the 6th
  appendages. Prae-genital somite suppressed. Respiratory organs
  tracheal, opening by a pair of stigmata situated immediately behind
  the basal segments of the 6th pair of appendages on what is probably
  the sternum of the 2nd opisthosomatic somite and also in some cases
  upon the 5th segment of the legs.

  Intromittent organ of male lying within the genital orifice.

  Sub-order a. Laniatores.--Orifice of foetid glands opening above the
  coxa of the 4th appendage, not raised upon a tubercle. Orifice of
  coxal gland situated just behind that of the foetid gland. Sternal
  plate of prosoma long and narrow, with a distinct prosternal element
  underlying the mouth. Coxae of 4th, 5th and 6th appendages immovable.
  Appendages of 2nd pair, strong, usually prehensile and spiny. Genital
  orifice covered by an operculum.

    Families--Gonoleptidae (_Gonoleptes, Goniasoma_).
              Biantidae (_Biantes_).
              Oncopodidae (_Oncopus, Pelitnus_).
              Trioenonychidae (_Trioenonyx, Acumontia_).

  Sub-order b. Palpatores.--Orifice of foetid glands opening above the
  coxa of the 3rd appendage, not raised upon a tubercle. Orifice of
  coxal gland situated between the coxae of the 5th and 6th appendages.
  Sternal plate of prosoma usually short and wide, rarely longer than
  broad; with a larger or smaller prosternal element underlying the
  mouth. Coxae of 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th appendages movable or
  immovable. Appendages of 2nd pair weak, pediform not prehensile.
  Genital orifice covered by an operculum.

    Families--Phalangiidae (_Phalangium, Gagrella_).
              Ischyropsalidae (_Ischyropsalis, Taracus_).
              Nemastomidae (_Nemastoma_).
              Trogulidae (_Trogulus, Anelasmocephalus_).

  Sub-order c. _Cyphophthalmi_ (_Anepignathi_).--Orifice of foetid
  glands opening on a tubercle situated near the lateral border of the
  carapace above the base of the 5th appendage. Orifice of coxal gland
  probably situated at base of coxa of 5th appendage; sternal plate of
  prosema minute or absent; no prosternal element underlying the mouth.
  Coxae of 5th and 6th, and usually also of 4th appendages immovable.
  Appendages of 2nd pair weak, pediform, not prehensile. Genital orifice
  not covered by an operculum.

    Families--Sironidae (_Siro, Pettalus_).
              Stylocellidae (_Stylocellus_).

  _Remarks on the Opiliones._--These include the harvest-men, sometimes
  called also daddy-long-legs, with round undivided bodies and very
  long, easily-detached legs. The intromittent organs of the male are
  remarkable for their complexity and elaboration. The confluence of the
  regions of the body and the dislocation of apertures from their
  typical position are results of degeneration. The Opiliones seem to
  lead on from the Spiders to the Mites. Reference to literature (39).

  [Illustration: FIG. 77.--_Stylocellus sumatranus_, one of the
  Opiliones; after Thorell. Enlarged.

    A, Dorsal view; I to VI, the six prosomatic appendages.
    B, Ventral view of the prosoma and of the first somite of the
      opisthosoma, with the appendages I to VI cut off at the base; a,
      tracheal stigma; mx, maxillary processes of the coxae of the 3rd
      pair of appendages; g, genital aperture.
    C, Ventral surface of the prosoma and opisthosoma; a, tracheal
      stigma; b, last somite.
    D, Lateral view of the 1st and 2nd pair of appendages.
    E, Lateral view of the whole body and two 1st appendages, showing
      the fusion of the dorsal elements of the prosoma into a single
      plate, and of those of the opisthosoma into an imperfectly
      segmented plate continuous with that of the prosoma.]

  Apparently related to the Opiliones are two extinct groups, the
  Anthracomarti and Phalangiotarbi, which are not known to have survived
  the Carboniferous period. In the Anthracomarti the opisthosoma was
  movably articulated to the prosoma, and consisted of from eight to ten
  segments furnished with movable lateral plates, the anal segment being
  overlapped dorsally by a laminate expansion of the preceding segment.
  The carapace of the prosoma was unsegmented and often bore a pair of
  eyes. The appendages of the 2nd pair were slender and pediform; those
  of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs were similar in form and ambulatory
  in function with their basal segments arranged round a sternal area as
  in the order Araneae. The best-known genera were _Anthracomartus_ and
  _Eophognus_.

  In the Phalangiotarbi the appendages resembled those of the
  Anthracomarti, except that the basal segments of the last four pairs
  were usually approximated in the middle line leaving a long and narrow
  sternal area between; and the carapace of the prosoma was unsegmented.
  The prosoma and opisthosoma were broadly confluent and probably
  immovably welded together. The opisthosoma consisted of eight or nine
  segments, whereof the anterior five or six were very short in the
  dorsal region, and the posterior three exceptionally large with the
  anal orifice terminal.

  Several genera have been established, the best-characterized being
  _Geraphognus_ and _Architarbus_.

  Order 9. Rhynchostomi = Acari (see fig. 78).--Degenerate Arachnids
  resembling the Opiliones in many structural points, but chiefly
  distinguishable from them by the following features:--The basal
  segments of the appendages of the 2nd pair are united in the middle
  line behind the mouth, those of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs are
  widely separated and not provided with sterno-coxal (maxillary) lobes,
  and take no share in mastication; the respiratory stigmata, when
  present, belong to the prosoma, and the primitive segmentation of the
  opisthosoma has entirely or almost entirely disappeared.

  Sub-order a. _Notostigmata._--Opisthosoma consisting of ten segments
  defined by integumental grooves, each of the anterior four of these
  furnished with a single pair of dorsally-placed spiracles or tracheal
  stigmata.

    Family--Opilioacaridae (_Opilioacarus_).

  Sub-order b. _Cryptostigmata._--Integument hard, strengthened by a
  continuously chitinized dorsal and ventral sclerite. Tracheae
  typically opening by stigmata situated in the articular sockets
  (acetabula) of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs of appendages.

    Family--Oribatidae (_Oribata, Nothrus, Hoplophora_).

  Sub-order c. _Metastigmata._--Integument mostly like that of the
  Cryptostigmata. Tracheae opening by a pair of stigmata situated above
  and behind the base of the 4th or 5th or 6th pair of appendages.

    Families--Gamasidae (_Gamasus, Pteroptus_).
              Argasidae (_Argas, Ornithodoros_).
              Ixodidae (_Ixodes, Rhipicephalus_).

  Sub-order d. _Prostigmata._--Integument soft, strengthened by special
  sclerites, those on the ventral surface of the prosoma apparently
  representing the basal segments of the legs embedded in the skin.
  Tracheae, except in the aquatic species in which they are atrophied,
  opening by a pair of stigmata situated close to or above the base of
  the appendages of the 1st pair (mandibles).

    Families--Trombidiidae (_Trombidium, Tetranychus_).
              Hydrachnidae (_Hydrachna, Atax_).
              Halacaridae (_Halacarus, Leptognathus_).
              Bdellidae (_Bdella, Eupodes_).

  [Illustration: FIG. 78.--_Holothyrus nitidissimus_, one of the Acari;
  after Thorell.

    A, Lateral view with appendages III to VI removed; 1, plate covering
      the whole dorsal area, representing the fused tergal sclerites of
      the prosoma and opisthosoma; 2, similarly-formed ventral plate; 3,
      tracheal stigma.
    B, Dorsal view of the same animal; II to VI, 2nd to 6th pairs of
      appendages. The 1st pair of appendages both in this and in C are
      retracted.
    C, Ventral view of the same; II to VI as in B; a, genital orifice;
      b, anus; c, united basal segments of the second pair of appendages;
      d, basal segment of the 6th prosomatic appendage of the right side.
      The rest of the appendage, as also of app. Ill, IV and V, has been
      cut away.]

  Sub-order e. _Astigmata._--Degenerate, mostly parasitic forms
  approaching the Prostigmata in the development of integumental
  sclerites and the softness of the skin, but with the respiratory
  system absent.

    Families--Tyroglyphidae (_Tyroglyphus, Rhizoglyphus_).
              Sarcoptidae (_Sarcoptes, Analges_).

  Sub-order f. _Vermiformia._--Degenerate atracheate parasitic forms
  with the body produced posteriorly into an annulated caudal
  prolongation, and the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs of appendages short
  and only three-jointed.

    Family--Demodicidae (_Demodex_).

  Sub-order g. _Tetrapoda._--Degenerate atracheate gall-mites in which
  the body is produced posteriorly and annulated, as in _Demodex_, but
  in which the appendages of the 3rd and 4th pairs are long and normally
  segmented and those of the 5th and 6th pairs entirely absent.

    Family--Eriophyidae (_Eriophyes, Phyllocoptes_).

  _Remarks on the Rhynchostomi._--The Acari include a number of forms
  which are of importance and special interest on account of their
  parasitic habits. The ticks (_Ixodes_) are not only injurious as
  blood-suckers, but are now credited with carrying the germs of Texas
  cattle-fever, just as mosquitoes carry those of malaria. The
  itch-insect (_Sarcoptes scabiei_) is a well-known human parasite, so
  minute that it was not discovered until the end of the 18th century,
  and "the itch" was treated medicinally as a rash. The female burrows
  in the epidermis much as the female trap-door spider burrows in turf
  in order to make a nest in which to rear her young. The male does not
  burrow, but wanders freely on the surface of the skin. _Demodex
  folliculorum_ is also a common parasite of the sebaceous glands of
  the skin of the face in man, and is frequent in the skin of the dog.
  Many Acari are parasitic on marine and freshwater molluscs, and others
  are found on the feathers of birds and the hair of mammals. Others
  have a special faculty of consuming dry, powdery vegetable and animal
  refuse, and are liable to multiply in manufactured products of this
  nature, such as mouldy cheese. A species of Acarus is recorded as
  infesting a store of powdered strychnine and feeding on that drug, so
  poisonous to larger organisms. Reference to literature (40).

  AUTHORITIES cited by numbers in the text.--1. Strauss-Dürckheim (as
  reported by MM. Riester and Sanson in an appendix to the sixth volume
  of the French translation of Meckel's _Anatomy_, 1829); 2. Lankester,
  "Limulus an Arachnid," _Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._ vol. xxi. N.S.,
  1881; 3. _Idem_, "On the Skeletotrophic Tissues of Limulus, Scorpio
  and Mygale," _Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._ vol. xxiv. N.S., 1884; 4.
  _Idem. Trans. Zool. Soc._ vol. xi., 1883; 5. Lankester and A.G.
  Bourne, "Eyes of Limulus and Scorpio," _Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._ vol.
  xxiii. N.S., Jan. 1883; 6. Milne-Edwards, A., "Recherches sur
  l'anatomie des Limules," _Ann. Sci. Nat._ 5th Series, _Zoologie_, vol.
  xvii., 1873; 7. Owen, Richard, "Anatomy of the King-Crab," _Trans.
  Linn. Soc. Lond._, vol. xxviii., 1872; 8. Kishinouye, "Development of
  _Limulus longispina_," _Journal of the Science College of Japan_, vol.
  v., 1892; 9. Brauer, "Development of Scorpion," _Zeitschrift für wiss.
  Zoologie_, vol. lix., 1895; 10. Hansen, H.J., "Organs and Characters
  in Different Orders of Arachnida," _Entomol. Meddel._ vol. iv. pp.
  137-149; 11. Watase, "On the Morphology of the Compound Eyes of
  Arthropods," _Studies from the Biolog. Lab. Johns Hopkins University_,
  vol. iv. pp 287-334; 12. Newport, George, "Nervous and Circulatory
  Systems in Myriapoda and Macrourous Arachnids," _Phil. Trans. Roy.
  Soc._, 1843; 13. Lankester, "Coxal Glands of Limulus, Scorpio and
  Mygale," _Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._ vol. xxiv. N.S., 1884; 13A. W.
  Patten and A.P. Hazen, "Development of the Coxal Glands of Limulus,"
  _Journ. of Morphology_, vol. xvi., 1900; 13B. Bernard, "Coxal Glands
  of Scorpio," _Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist._ vol. xii., 1893, p. 55; 14.
  Benham, "Testis of Limulus," _Trans. Linn. Soc._, 1882; 15. Lankester,
  "Mobility of the Spermatozoa of Limulus," _Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._
  vol. xviii. N.S., 1878; 16. Korschelt and Heider,
  _Entwickelungsgeschichte_ (Jena, 1892), _ibique citata_; 17. Laurie,
  M., "The Embryology of a Scorpion," _Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._ vol.
  xxxi. N.S., 1890, and "On Development of _Scorpio fulvipes_," _ibid._
  vol. xxxii., 1891; 18. Lankester (Homoplasy and Homogeny), "On the Use
  of the term Homology in Modern Zoology," _Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist._,
  1870; 19. _Idem_, "Degeneration, a Chapter in Darwinism," 1878,
  reprinted in the _Advancement of Science_ (Macmillan, 1890); 20.
  _Idem_, "Limulus an Arachnid," _Q. J. Micr. Sci._ vol. xxi. N.S.; 21.
  Claus, "Degeneration of the Acari and Classification of Arthropoda,"
  _Anzeiger d. k. k. Akad. Wissen. Wien_, 1885; see also _Ann. and Mag.
  Nat. Hist._ (5) vol. xvii., 1886, p. 364, and vol. xix. p. 225; 22.
  Lindstrom, G., "Researches on the Visual Organs of the Trilobites,"
  _K. Svenska Vet. Akad. Handl._ xxxiv. No. 8, pp. 1-86, Pls. i.-vi.,
  1901; 22*. Zittel, American edition of his _Palaeontology_ (the
  Macmillan Co., New York), where ample references to the literature of
  Trilobitae and Eurypteridae will be found; also references to
  literature of fossil Scorpions and Spiders; 23. Hoek, "Report on the
  Pycnogonida," _Challenger Expedition Reports_, 1881; Meinert,
  "Pycnogonida of the Danish Ingolf Expedition," vol. iii., 1899;
  Morgan, "Embryology and Phylogeny of the Pycnogonids," _Biol. Lab.
  Baltimore_, vol. v., 1891; 24. Bourne, A.G., "The Reputed Suicide of
  the Scorpion," _Proc. Roy. Soc._ vol. xlii. pp. 17-22; 25. Lankester,
  "Notes on some Habits of Scorpions," _Journ. Linn. Soc. Zool._ vol.
  xvi. p. 455, 1882; 26. Huxley, "Pharynx of Scorpion," _Quart. Journ.
  Micr. Sci._ vol. viii. (old series), 1860, p. 250; 27. Pocock, "How
  and Why Scorpions hiss," _Natural Science_, vol. ix., 1896; cf.
  _idem_, "Stridulating Organs of Spiders," _Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist._
  (6), xvi. pp. 230-233; 28. Kraepelin, _Das Thierreich (Scorpiones et
  Pedipalpi_) (Berlin, 1899); Peters, "Eine neue Eintheilung der
  Skorpione," _Man. Akad. Wiss. Berlin_, 1861; Pocock, "Classification
  of Scorpions," _Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist._ (6) xii., 1893; Thorell and
  Lindstrom, "On a Silurian Scorpion," _Kongl. Svens. Vet. Akad. Handl._
  xxi. No. 9, 1885; 29. Cambridge, O.P., "A New Family (Tartarides) and
  Genus of Thelyphonidea," _Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist._ (4) x., 1872, p.
  413; Cook, "Hubbardia, a New Genus of Pedipalpi," _Proc. Entom. Soc.
  Washington_, vol. iv., 1899; Thorell, "Tartarides, &c." _Ann. Mus.
  Genova_, vol. xxvii., 1889; 30. M Cook, _American Spiders and their
  Spinning Work_ (3 vols.; Philadelphia, 1889-1893); 31. Peckham, "On
  Sexual Selection in Spiders," _Occasional Papers Nat. Hist. Soc.
  Wisconsin_, vol. i. pp. 1-113, 1889; 32. Moggridge, _Harvesting Ants
  and Trap-Door Spiders_ (1873); 33. Bertkau, Ph., _Arch. f.
  Naturgesch._ vol. xlviii. pp. 316-362; _Idem_, same journal, 1875, p.
  235, and 1878, p. 351; Cambridge, O.P., "Araneidea" in _Biologia
  Centr. Americana_, vols. i. and ii. (London, 1899); Keyserling,
  _Spinnen Amerikas_ (Nuremberg, 1880-1892); Pocock, "Liphistius and the
  Classification of Spiders," _Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist._ (6) x., 1892;
  Simon, _Hist. nat. des Araignées_, vols. i. and ii., 1892, 1897;
  Wagner, "L'Industrie des Araneína," _Mem. Acad. St-Pétersbourg_;
  _Idem_, "La Mue des Araignées," _Ann. Sci. Nat._ vol. vi.; 34. Grassi,
  G.B. "Intorno ad un nuovo Aracnide artrogastro (_Koenenia mirabilis_)
  &c." _Boll. Soc. Ent. Ital._ vol. xviii., 1886; 35. H.J. Hansen and
  Sörensen, "The Order Palpigradi, Thorell (_Koenenia_), and its
  Relationships with other Arachnida," _Ent. Tidskr._ vol. xviii. pp.
  233-240, 1898; Kraepelin, _Das Thierreich_ (Berlin, 1901); 36.
  Bernard. "Compar. Morphol. of the Galeodidae," _Trans. Linn. Soc.
  Zool._ vol. vi., 1896, _ibique citata_; Dufour, "Galeodes," _Mém.
  prés. Acad. Sci. Paris_, vol. xvii., 1862; Kraepelin, _Das Thierreich_
  (Berlin, 1901); Pocock, "Taxonomy of Solifugae," _Ann. and Mag. Nat.
  Hist._ vol. xx.; 37. Balzan, "Voyage au Vénézuela (Pseudoscorpiones),"
  _Ann. Soc. Entom. France_, 1891, pp. 497-522; 38. Guérin-Méneville,
  _Rev. Zool._, 1838, p. II; Karsch, "Ueber Cryptostemma Guer."
  _Berliner entom. Zeitschrift_, xxxviii. pp. 25-32, 1892; Thorell, "On
  an apparently new Arachnid belonging to the family _Cryptostemmidae_,"
  _Westv. Bihang Svenska Vet. Akad. Handligar_, vol. xvii. No. 9, 1892;
  39. Hansen and Sorensen, _On Two Orders of Arachnida_ (Cambridge,
  1904); Sörensen, "_Opiliones laniatores_," _Nat. Tidskr._ (3) vol.
  xiv., 1884; Thorell, "Opilioni," _Ann. Mus. Genova_, vol. viii., 1876;
  40. Berlese, "Acari, &c., in Italia reperta" (Padova, 1892);
  Canestrini, _Acarofauna Italiana_ (Padova, 1885); Canestrini and
  Kramer, "Demodicidae and Sarcoptidae" in _Das Thierreich_ (Berlin,
  1899); Michael, "British Oribatidae," _Ray Soc._; _Idem_, "Oribatidae"
  in _Das Thierreich_ (Berlin, 1898); _Idem_, "Progress and Present
  State of Knowledge of Acari," _Journ. Roy. Micr. Soc._, 1894; Nalepa,
  "Phytoptidae," _Das Thierreich_ (Berlin, 1898); Trouessart,
  "Classification des Acariens," _Rev. Sci. Nat. de l'ouest._ p. 289,
  1892; Wagner, _Embryonal Entwick, von Ixodes_ (St Petersburg, 1803);
  41. Bertkau, Ph., "Coxaldrusen der Arachniden," _Sitzb. Niederl.
  Gesellsch._, 1885; 42. Patten, W., "Brain and Sense Organs of
  Limulus," _Quart. Journ. Mic. Sci._ vol. xxxv., 1894; see also his
  "Origin of Vertebrates from Arachnids," _ibid._ vol. xxxi.

  Authorities not cited by numbers in the text:--

  Lung-books:--Berteaux, "Le Poumon des Arachnides," _La Cellule_, vol.
  v. 1891; Jawarowski, "Die Entwick. d. sogen. Lunge bei der
  Arachniden," _Zeitsch. wiss. Zool._ vol. lviii., 1894; Macleod,
  "Recherches sur la structure et la signification de l'appareil
  respiratoire des Arachnides," _Arch. d. Biologie._ vol. v., 1884;
  Schneider, A., "Mélanges arachnologiques," in _Tablettes zoologiques_,
  vol. ii. p. 135, 1892; Simmons, "Development of Lung in Spiders,"
  _Amer. Journ. Science_, vol. xlviii., 1894. Coxal Glands:--Bertkau,
  "Ueber die Coxaldrusen der Arachniden," _Sitzb. d. Niederl.
  Gesellsch._, 1885; Loman, "Altes und neues über das Nephridium (die
  Coxaldrüse) der Arachniden," _Bÿd. tot de Dierkunde_, vol. xiv., 1887;
  Macleod, "Glande coxale chez les Galéodes," _Bull. Acad. Belg._ (3)
  vol. viii., 1884; Pelseneer, "On the Coxal Glands of Mygale," _Proc.
  Zool. Soc._, 1885; Tower, "The External Opening of the brick-red
  Glands of Limulus," _Zool. Anzeiger_, vol. xviii. p. 471, 1895.
  Ento-sternite:--Schimkewitsch, "Bau und Entwick. des Endosternites der
  Arachniden," _Zool. Jahrb._, Anal. Abtheil., vol. viii., 1894.
  Embryology:--Balfour, "Development of the Araneina," _Q. J. Micr.
  Sci._ vol. xx., 1880; Kingsley, "The Embryology of Limulus," _Journ.
  Morphology_, vols. vii. and viii.; Kishinouye, "Development of
  Araneina," _Journ. Coll. Sci. Univ. of Japan_, vol. iv., 1890; Locy,
  "Development of Agelena," _Bull. Mus. Harvard_, vol. xii., 1885;
  Metchnikoff, "Embryologie d. Scorpion," _Zeit. wiss. Zool._ vol. xxi.,
  1871; _Idem_, "Embryol. Chelifer," _Zeit. wiss. Zool._ vol. xxi.,
  1871; Schimkewitsch, "Développement des Araignées," _Archives d.
  Biologie_, vol. vi. 1887. Sense organs:--Bertkau, "Sinnesorgane der
  Spinnen," _Arch. f. mikros. Anat._ vol. xxvii. p. 589, 1886; Graber,
  "Unicorneale Tracheaten Auge," _Arch. f. mikr. Anat._ vol. xvii.,
  1879; Grenacher, _Gehörorgane der Arthropoden_ (Göttingen, 1879);
  Kishinouye, "Lateral Eyes of Spiders," _Zool. Anz._ vol. xiv. p. 381,
  1891; Purcell, "Phalangiden Augen," _Zool. Anzeiger_, vol. xv. p. 461.

  General works on Arachnida:--Blanchard, "Les Arachnides" in
  _L'Organisation du regne animal_; Gaubert, "Recherches sur les
  Arachnides," _Ann. Sci. Nat._ (7) vol. xiii., 1892; Koch, C., _Die
  Arachniden_ (16 vols., Nuremberg, 1831-1848); Koch, Keyserling and
  Sörensen, _Die Arachniden Australiens_ (Nuremberg, 1871-1890); Pocock,
  _Arachnida of British India_ (London, 1900); _Idem_, "On African
  Arachnida," in _Proc. Zool. Soc._ and _Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist._,
  1897-1900; Simon, _Les Arachnides de la France_ (7 vols., Paris,
  1874-1881); Thorell, "Arachnida from the Oriental Region," _Ann. Mus.
  Genova_, 1877-1899.     (E. R. L.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] See the article ARTHROPODA for the use of the term "prosthomere."

  [2] See fig. 12 in the article ARTHROPODA.

  [3] Though ten is the prevailing number of retinula cells and
    rhabdomeres in the lateral eye of Limulus, Watase states that they
    may be as few as nine and as many as eighteen.

  [4] A great deal of superfluous hypothesis has lately been put
    forward in the name of "the principle of convergence of characters"
    by a certain school of palaeontologists. The horse is supposed by
    these writers to have originated by separate lines of descent in the
    Old World and the New, from five-toed ancestors! And the important
    consequences following from the demonstration of the identity in
    structure of Limulus and Scorpio are evaded by arbitrary and even
    phantastic invocations of a mysterious transcendental force which
    brings about "convergence" irrespective of heredity and selection.
    Morphology becomes a farce when such assumptions are made. (E. R. L.)

  [5] A pair of round tubercles on the labram (camerostome or
    hypostoma) of several species of Trilobites has been described and
    held to be a pair of eyes (22). Sense-organs in a similar position
    were discovered in Limulus by Patten (42) in 1894.

  [6] The writer is indebted to R.I. Pocock, assistant in the Natural
    History departments of the British Museum, for valuable assistance in
    the preparation of this article and for the classification and
    definition of the groups of Eu-arachnida here given. The general
    scheme and some of the details have been brought by the writer into
    agreement with the views maintained in this article. Pocock accepts
    those views in all essential points and has, as a special student of
    the Arachnida, given to them valuable expansion and confirmation. The
    writer also desires to express his thanks to Messrs. Macmillan & Co.
    for permission to use figs. 22, 43, 44 and 45, which are taken from
    Parker and Haswell's _Text-book of Zoology_; and to Messrs. Swan
    Sonnenschein & Co. for the loan of several figures from the
    translations published by them of the admirable treatise on
    _Embryology_ by Professors Korschelt and Heider; also to the
    publishers of the treatise on _Palaeontology_ by Professor Zittel,
    Herr Oldenbourg and The Macmillan Co., New York, for several cuts of
    extinct forms.

  [7] Pocock suggests that the area marked vii. in the outline figure
    of the dorsal view of _Limulus_ (fig. 7) may be the tergum of the
    suppressed prae-genital somite. Embryological evidence must settle
    whether this is so or not.