ARAN ISLANDS, or SOUTH ARAN, three islands lying across Galway Bay, on
the west coast of Ireland, in a south-easterly direction, forming a kind
of natural breakwater. They belong to the county Galway, and their
population in 1901 was 2863. They are called respectively--beginning
with the northernmost--Inishmore (or Aranmore), the Great Island;
Inishmaan, the Middle Island; and Inisheer, the Eastern Island. The
first has an elevation of 354 ft., the second of 259, and the third of
202. Their formation is carboniferous limestone. These islands are
remarkable for a number of architectural remains of a very early date.
In Inishmore there stand, on a cliff 220 ft. high, large remains of a
circular cyclopean tower, called Dun-Aengus, ascribed to the Fir-bolg or
Belgae; or, individually, to the first of three brothers, Aengus,
Conchobar and Nil, who reached Aran Islands from Scotland in the 1st
century A.D. There are seven other similar structures in the group.
Inishmore also bears the name of _Aran-na-naomh_, Aran-of-the-Saints,
from the number of religious recluses who took up their abode in it, and
gave a celebrity to the holy wells, altars and shrines, to which many
are still attracted. No less, indeed, than twenty buildings of
ecclesiastical or monastic character have been enumerated in the three
islands. On Inishmore are remains of the abbey of Killenda. Christianity
was introduced in the 5th century, and Aran soon became one of the most
famous island-resorts of religious teachers and ascetics. The
extraordinary fame of the foundations here has been inferred from the
inscription "VII. Romani" on a stone in the church Teampull Brecain on
Inishmore, attributed to disciples from Rome. The total area of the
islands is 11,579 acres. The Congested Districts Board made many efforts
to improve the condition of the inhabitants, especially by introducing
better methods of fishing. A curing station is established at Killeany,
the harbour of Inishmore.