ARBER, EDWARD (1836-   ), English man of letters, was born in London on
the 4th of December 1836. From 1854 to 1878 he was a clerk in the
admiralty; from 1878 to 1881 lecturer on English, under Prof. H. Morley,
at University College; and from 1881 to 1894 professor of English at
Mason College, Birmingham. From 1894 he lived in London as emeritus
professor, being also a fellow of King's College. In 1905 he received
the honorary degree of D. Litt. at Oxford. He married in 1869, and had
two sons, one of them, E.A.N. Arber, becoming demonstrator in
palaeobotany at Cambridge. As a scholarly editor Professor Arber's
services to English literature are memorable. His name is associated
particularly with the series of "English Reprints" (1868-1880), by which
an accurate text of the works of many English authors, formerly only
accessible in rare or expensive editions, was placed within reach of the
general public. Among the thirty volumes of the series were Gosson's
_School of Abuse_, Ascham's _Toxophilus_, _Tottel's Miscellany_,
Naunton's _Fragmenta Regalia_, &c. It was followed by the "English
Scholar's Library" (16 vols.) which included the _Works_ (1884) of
Captain John Smith, governor of Virginia, and the _Poems_ (1882) of
Richard Barnfield. In his _English Garner_ (8 vols. 1877-1896) he made
an admirable collection of rare old tracts and poems; in 1899-1901 he
issued _British Anthologies_ (10 vols.), and in 1907 began a series
called _A Christian Library_. He also accomplished single-handed the
editing of two vast, and invaluable, English bibliographies: _A
Transcript of the Registers of the Stationers' Company, 1553-1640_
(1875-1894), and _The Term Catalogues, 1668-1709; with a number for
Easter Term 1711_ (1904-1906), edited from the quarterly lists of the
booksellers.