ARBELA (ARBA'IL, i.e. "Four-god-city"), an ancient town in Adiabene, the
capital in Assyrian and pre-Assyrian times of the country between the
greater and lesser Zab, and seat of an important cult of Ishtar. The
battle in which Alexander overthrew Darius in 331 B.C., though named in
the old books after Arbela, was probably fought at Gaugamela, some 60 m.
away (Yorck von Wartenburg, _Kurze Übersicht der Feldzüge A. des Gr._).
The modern town of Erbil or Arbil, in the vilayet of Mosul, is about 40
m. from Mosul on the road to Bagdad. The greater part of the town, which
seems at one time to have been very large, is situated on an artificial
mound about 150 ft. high. It became the seat of the Ayyubite sultan
Saladin in 1184; was bequeathed in 1233 to the caliphs of Bagdad; was
plundered by the Mongols in 1236 and in 1393 by Timur, and was taken in
1732 by the Persians under Nadir Shah. In the 14th century the
Christians were almost exterminated. The population, which varies from
2000 to 6000, is chiefly composed of Kurds.

The ruins of another ARBELA (Irbid, Beth-Arbel) in Palestine, situated
near the west shore of the Sea of Galilee, a little north of its centre,
are not in themselves of high interest, but the site is noteworthy
through its connexion with the neighbouring caves in the lofty flank of
the Wadi Hamam, above which Arbela stood. These caves (called by the
Arabs Kulat ibn Ma'an) are apparently natural, but were enlarged and
fortified. They were used by the inhabitants of Arbela as a place of
refuge from the army of Bacchides, general of Demetrius III., king of
Syria, and were the resort of bandits in the reign of Herod the Great.
He laid siege to them, and his men could only gain access to the caves
by being let down from above. The caves were also fortified against the
Romans by Josephus.