ARBOR VITAE (Tree of Life), a name given by Clusius to species of
_Thuja_. The name _Thuja_, which was adopted by Linnaeus from the
_Thuya_ of Tournefort, seems to be derived from the Greek word [Greek:
thuos], signifying sacrifice, probably because the resin procured from
the plant was used as incense. The plants belong to the natural order
Coniferae, tribe Cupressineae (Cypresses). _Thuja occidentalis_ is the
Western or American arbor vitae, the _Cupressus Arbor Vitae_ of old
authors. It is a native of North America, and ranges from Canada to the
mountains of Virginia and Carolina. It is a moderate-sized tree, and was
introduced into Britain before 1597, when it was mentioned in Gerard's
_Herbal_. In its native country it attains a height of about 50 ft. The
leaves are small and imbricate, and are borne on flattened branches,
which are apt to be mistaken for the leaves. When bruised the leaves
give out an aromatic odour. The flowers appear early in spring, and the
fruit is ripened about the end of September. In Britain the plant is a
hardy evergreen, and can only be looked upon as a large shrub or low
tree. It is often cut so as to form hedges in gardens. The wood is very
durable and useful for outdoor work, such as fencing, posts, etc.
Another species of arbor vitae is _Thuja orientalis_, known also as
_Biota orientalis_. The latter generic name is derived from the Greek
adjective [Greek: biotos], formed from [Greek: bios], life, probably in
connexion with the name "tree of life." This is the Eastern or Chinese
arbor vitae. It is a native of China. It was cultivated in the Chelsea
Physick Garden in 1752, and was believed to have been sent to Europe by
French missionaries. It has roundish cones, with numerous scales and
wingless seeds. The leaves, which have a pungent aromatic odour, are
said to yield a yellow dye. There are numerous varieties of this plant
in cultivation, one of the most remarkable of which is the variety
_pendula_, with long, flexible, hanging, cord-like branches; it was
discovered in Japan about 1776 by Carl Peter Thunberg, a pupil of
Linnaeus, who made valuable collections at the Cape of Good Hope, in the
Dutch East Indies and in Japan. The variety _pygmaea_ forms a small bush
a few inches high.

_Thuja gigantea_, the red or canoe cedar, a native of north-western
America from southern Alaska to north California, is the finest species,
the trunk rising from a massive base to the height of 150 to 200 ft. It
was not introduced to Britain till 1853. It is one of the handsomest of
conifers, forming an elongated cone of foliage, which in some gardens
has already reached 70 or 80 ft. in height. It thrives in most kinds of
soils. The timber is easily worked and used for construction, especially
where exposed to the weather.