ARBOIS DE JUBAINVILLE, MARIE HENRI D' (1827-1910), French historian and
philologist, was born at Nancy on the 5th of December 1827. In 1851 he
left the École des Chartes with the degree of palaeographic archivist.
He was placed in control of the departmental archives of Aube, and
remained in that position until 1880, when he retired on a pension. He
published several volumes of inventorial abstracts, a _Répertoire
archéologique du département_ in 1861; a valuable _Histoire des ducs et
comtes de Champagne depuis le VI^e siècle jusqu'à la fin du XI^e_, which
was published between 1859 and 1869 (8 vols.), and in 1880 an
instructive monograph upon _Les Intendants de Champagne_. But already he
had become attracted towards the study of the most ancient inhabitants
of Gaul; in 1870 he brought out an _Étude sur la déclinaison des noms
propres dans la langue franque à l'époque mérovingienne_; and in 1877 a
learned work upon _Les Premiers Habitants de l'Europe_ (2nd edition in 2
vols. 1889 and 1894). Next he concentrated his efforts upon the field of
Celtic languages, literature and law, in which he soon became an
authority. Appointed in 1882 to the newly founded professorial chair of
Celtic at the Collège de France, he began the _Cours de littérature
celtique_ which in 1908 extended to twelve volumes. For this he himself
edited the following works: _Introduction a l'étude de la littérature
celtique_ (1883); _L'Épopée celtique en Irlande_ (1892); _Études sur le
droit celtique_ (1895); and _Les Principaux Auteurs de l'antiquité à
consulter sur l'histoire des Celtes_ (1902). He was among the first in
France to enter upon the study of the most ancient monuments of Irish
literature with a solid philological preparation and without empty
prejudices. We owe to him also _Les Celtes depuis les temps les plus
reculés jusqu'à l'an 100 avant noire ère_ (1904), and a study of
comparative law in _La Famille celtique_ (1905). Numerous detailed
studies upon the Gaulish names of persons and places took synthetic form
in the _Recherches sur l'origine de la propriété foncière_ (1890), which
illumined one of the most interesting aspects of the Roman occupation of
Gaul. _The Recueil de mémoires concernant la littérature et l'histoire
celtiques_, made by the most notable among his disciples on the occasion
of his seventy-eighth birthday (1906), was a well-deserved tribute to
his persevering and fruitful industry. He died in February 1910.
     (C. B.*)