ARBUTHNOT, ALEXANDER (1538-1583), Scottish ecclesiastic and poet,
educated at St Andrews and Bourges, was in 1569 elected principal of
King's College, Aberdeen, which office he retained until his death. He
played an active part in the stirring church politics of the period, and
was twice moderator of the kirk, and a member of the commission of
inquiry into the condition of the university of St Andrews (1583). The
"correctness" of his attitude on all public questions won for him the
commendation of Catholic writers; he is not included in Nicol Burne's
list of "periurit apostatis"; but his policy and influence were misliked
by James VI., who, when the Assembly had elected Arbuthnot to the charge
of the church of St Andrews, ordered him to return to his duties at
King's College. He had been for some time minister of Arbuthnott in
Kincardineshire. His extant works are (_a_) three poems, "The Praises of
Wemen" (224 lines), "On Luve" (10 lines), and "The Miseries of a Pure
Scholar" (189 lines), and (_b_) a Latin account of the Arbuthnot family,
_Originis et Incrementi Arbuthnoticae Familiae Descriptio Historica_
(still in MS.), of which an English continuation, by the father of Dr
John Arbuthnot, is preserved in the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh. The
praise of the fair sex in the first poem is exceptional in the
literature of his age; and its geniality may help us to understand the
author's popularity with his contemporaries. Arbuthnot must not be
confused with his contemporary and namesake, the Edinburgh printer, who
produced the first edition of Buchanan's _History of Scotland_ in 1582.
Some have discovered in the publication of this work a false clue to
James's resentment against the principal of King's College.

  The particulars of Arbuthnot's life are found in Calderwood,
  Spottiswood, and other Church historians, and in Scott's _Fasti
  Ecclesiae Scoticanae_. The poems are printed in Pinkerton's _Ancient
  Scottish Poems_ (1786), i. pp. 138-155.