ARCESILAUS (316-241 B.C.), a Greek philosopher and founder of the New,
or Middle, Academy (see ACADEMY, GREEK). Born at Pitane in Aeolis, he
was trained by Autolycus, the mathematician, and later at Athens by
Theophrastus and Crantor, by whom he was led to join the Academy. He
subsequently became intimate with Polemon and Crates, whom he succeeded
as head of the school. Diogenes Laërtius says that he died of excessive
drinking, but the testimony of others (e.g. Cleanthes) and his own
precepts discredit the story, and he is known to have been much
respected by the Athenians. His doctrines, which must be gathered from
the writings of others (Cicero, _Acad._ i. 12, iv. 24; _De Orat._ iii.
18; Diogenes Laërtius iv. 28; Sextus Empiricus, _Adv. Math._ vii. 150,
_Pyrrh. Hyp._ i. 233), represent an attack on the Stoic [Greek:
phantasia katalaeptikae] (_Criterion_) and are based on the sceptical
element (see SCEPTICISM) which was latent in the later writings of
Plato. He held that strength of intellectual conviction cannot be
regarded as valid, inasmuch as it is characteristic equally of
contradictory convictions. The uncertainty of sensible _data_ applies
equally to the conclusions of reason, and therefore man must be content
with _probability_ which is sufficient as a practical guide. "We know
nothing, not even our ignorance"; therefore the wise man will be content
with an agnostic attitude. He made use of the Socratic method of
instruction and left no writings. His arguments were marked by incisive
humour and fertility of ideas.

  See R. Brodeisen, _De Arcesila philosopho_ (1821); Aug. Geffers, _De
  Arcesila_ (1842); Ritter and Preller, _Hist, philos. graec._ (1898);
  Ed. Zeller, _Phil. d. Griech._ (iii. 1448); and general works under
  SCEPTICISM.