ARCHIMEDES (c. 287-212 B.C.), Greek mathematician and inventor, was born
at Syracuse, in Sicily. He was the son of Pheidias, an astronomer, and
was on intimate terms with, if not related to, Hiero, king of Syracuse,
and Gelo his son. He studied at Alexandria and doubtless met there Conon
of Samos, whom he admired as a mathematician and cherished as a friend,
and to whom he was in the habit of communicating his discoveries before
publication. On his return to his native city he devoted himself to
mathematical research. He himself set no value on the ingenious
mechanical contrivances which made him famous, regarding them as beneath
the dignity of pure science and even declining to leave any written
record of them except in the case of the [Greek: sphairopoiia]
(_Sphere-making_), as to which see below. As, however, these machines
impressed the popular imagination, they naturally figure largely in the
traditions about him. Thus he devised for Hiero engines of war which
almost terrified the Romans, and which protracted the siege of Syracuse
for three years. There is a story that he constructed a burning mirror
which set the Roman ships on fire when they were within a bowshot of the
wall. This has been discredited because it is not mentioned by Polybius,
Livy or Plutarch; but it is probable that Archimedes had constructed
some such burning instrument, though the connexion of it with the
destruction of the Roman fleet is more than doubtful. More important, as
being doubtless connected with the discovery of the principle in
hydrostatics which bears his name and the foundation by him of that
whole science, is the story of Hiero's reference to him of the question
whether a crown made for him and purporting to be of gold, did not
actually contain a proportion of silver. According to one story,
Archimedes was puzzled till one day, as he was stepping into a bath and
observed the water running over, it occurred to him that the excess of
bulk occasioned by the introduction of alloy could be measured by
putting the crown and an equal weight of gold separately into a vessel
filled with water, and observing the difference of overflow. He was so
overjoyed when this happy thought struck him that he ran home without
his clothes, shouting [Greek: euraeka, euraeka], "I have found it, I
have found it." Similarly his pioneer work in mechanics is illustrated
by the story of his having said [Greek: dos moi pon sto kai kino taen
gaen] (or as another version has it, in his dialect, [Greek: pa bo kai
kino tan gan]), "Give me a place to stand and I (will) move the earth."
Hiero asked him to give an illustration of his contention that a very
great weight could be moved by a very small force. He is said to have
fixed on a large and fully laden ship and to have used a mechanical
device by which Hiero was enabled to move it by himself: but accounts
differ as to the particular mechanical powers employed. The water-screw
which he invented (see below) was probably devised in Egypt for the
purpose of irrigating fields.

Archimedes died at the capture of Syracuse by Marcellus, 212 B.C. In the
general massacre which followed the fall of the city, Archimedes, while
engaged in drawing a mathematical figure on the sand, was run through
the body by a Roman soldier. No blame attaches to the Roman general,
Marcellus, since he had given orders to his men to spare the house and
person of the sage; and in the midst of his triumph he lamented the
death of so illustrious a person, directed an honourable burial to be
given him, and befriended his surviving relatives. In accordance with
the expressed desire of the philosopher, his tomb was marked by the
figure of a sphere inscribed in a cylinder, the discovery of the
relation between the volumes of a sphere and its circumscribing cylinder
being regarded by him as his most valuable achievement. When Cicero was
quaestor in Sicily (75 B.C.), he found the tomb of Archimedes, near the
Agrigentine gate, overgrown with thorns and briers. "Thus," says Cicero
(_Tusc. Disp._, v. c. 23, § 64), "would this most famous and once most
learned city of Greece have remained a stranger to the tomb of one of
its most ingenious citizens, had it not been discovered by a man of
Arpinum."

  _Works._--The range and importance of the scientific labours of
  Archimedes will be best understood from a brief account of those
  writings which have come down to us; and it need only be added that
  his greatest work was in geometry, where he so extended the method of
  _exhaustion_ as originated by Eudoxus, and followed by Euclid, that it
  became in his hands, though purely geometrical in form, actually
  equivalent in several cases to _integration_, as expounded in the
  first chapters of our text-books on the integral calculus. This remark
  applies to the finding of the area of a parabolic segment (mechanical
  solution) and of a spiral, the surface and volume of a sphere and of a
  segment thereof, and the volume of any segments of the solids of
  revolution of the second degree.

  The extant treatises are as follows:--

  (1) _On the Sphere and Cylinder_ (Greek: Peri sphairas kai
  kylindron]). This treatise is in two books, dedicated to Dositheus,
  and deals with the dimensions of spheres, cones, "solid rhombi" and
  cylinders, all demonstrated in a strictly geometrical method. The
  first book contains forty-four propositions, and those in which the
  most important results are finally obtained are: 13 (surface of right
  cylinder), 14, 15 (surface of right cone), 33 (surface of sphere), 34
  (volume of sphere and its relation to that of circumscribing
  cylinder), 42, 43 (surface of segment of sphere), 44 (volume of sector
  of sphere). The second book is in nine propositions, eight of which
  deal with segments of spheres and include the problems of cutting a
  given sphere by a plane so that (a) the surfaces, (b) the volumes,
  of the segments are in a given ratio (Props. 3, 4), and of
  constructing a segment of a sphere similar to one given segment and
  having (a) its volume, (b) its surface, equal to that of another
  (5, 6).

  (2) _The Measurement of the Circle_ ([Greek: Kuklou metraesis]) is a
  short book of three propositions, the main result being obtained in
  Prop. 2, which shows that the circumference of a circle is less than
  3-1/7 and greater than 3-10/71 times its diameter. Inscribing in and
  circumscribing about a circle two polygons, each of ninety-six sides,
  and assuming that the perimeter of the circle lay between those of the
  polygons, he obtained the limits he has assigned by sheer calculation,
  starting from two close approximations to the value of [root]3, which
  he assumes as known (265/153 < [root]3 < 1351/780).

  (3) _On Conoids and Spheroids_ ([Greek: Peri konoeideon kai
  sphairoeideon]) is a treatise in thirty-two propositions, on the
  solids generated by the revolution of the conic sections about their
  axes, the main results being the comparisons of the volume of any
  segment cut off by a plane with that of a cone having the same base
  and axis (Props. 21, 22 for the paraboloid, 25, 26 for the
  hyperboloid, and 27-32 for the spheroid).

  (4) _On Spirals_ ([Greek: Peri helikon]) is a book of twenty-eight
  propositions. Propositions 1-11 are preliminary, 13-20 contain
  tangential properties of the curve now known as the spiral of
  Archimedes, and 21-28 show how to express the area included between
  any portion of the curve and the radii vectores to its extremities.

  (5) _On the Equilibrium of Planes or Centres of Gravity of Planes_
  ([Greek: Peri hepipedon isorropion ae kentra baron hepipedon]). This
  consists of two books, and may be called the foundation of theoretical
  mechanics, for the previous contributions of Aristotle were
  comparatively vague and unscientific. In the first book there are
  fifteen propositions, with seven postulates; and demonstrations are
  given, much the same as those still employed, of the centres of
  gravity (1) of any two weights, (2) of any parallelogram, (3) of any
  triangle, (4) of any trapezium. The second book in ten propositions is
  devoted to the finding the centres of gravity (1) of a parabolic
  segment, (2) of the area included between any two parallel chords and
  the portions of the curve intercepted by them.

  (6) _The Quadrature of the Parabola_ ([Greek: Tetragonisaeos
  parabolaes]) is a book in twenty-four propositions, containing two
  demonstrations that the area of any segment of a parabola is 4/3 of
  the triangle which has the same base as the segment and equal height.
  The first (a mechanical proof) begins, after some preliminary
  propositions on the parabola, in Prop. 6, ending with an integration
  in Prop. 16. The second (a geometrical proof) is expounded in Props.
  17-24.

  (7) _On Floating Bodies_ ([Greek: Peri ochoumenon]) is a treatise in
  two books, the first of which establishes the general principles of
  hydrostatics, and the second discusses with the greatest completeness
  the positions of rest and stability of a right segment of a paraboloid
  of revolution floating in a fluid.

  (8) The _Psammites_ ([Greek: Psammitaes], Lat. _Arenarius_, or sand
  reckoner), a small treatise, addressed to Gelo, the eldest son of
  Hiero, expounding, as applied to reckoning the number of grains of
  sand that could be contained in a sphere of the size of our
  "universe," a system of naming large numbers according to "orders" and
  "periods" which would enable any number to be expressed up to that
  which we should write with 1 followed by 80,000 ciphers!

  (9) _A Collection of Lemmas_, consisting of fifteen propositions in
  plane geometry. This has come down to us through a Latin version of an
  Arabic manuscript; it cannot, however, have been written by Archimedes
  in its present form, as his name is quoted in it more than once.

  Lastly, Archimedes is credited with the famous _Cattle-Problem_,
  enunciated in the epigram edited by G.E. Lessing in 1773, which
  purports to have been sent by Archimedes to the mathematicians at
  Alexandria in a letter to Eratosthenes. Of lost works by Archimedes we
  can identify the following: (1) investigations on _polyhedra_
  mentioned by Pappus; (2) [Greek: Harchai], _Principles_, a book
  addressed to Zeuxippus and dealing with the _naming of numbers_ on the
  system explained in the _Sand Reckoner_; (3) [Greek: Peri zygon], _On
  balances or levers_; (4) [Greek: Kentrobarika], _On centres of
  gravity_; (5) [Greek: Katoptrika], an optical work from which Theon of
  Alexandria quotes a remark about refraction; (6) [Greek: Hephodion], a
  _Method_, mentioned by Suidas; (7) [Greek: Peri sphairopoiias], _On
  Sphere-making_, in which Archimedes explained the construction of the
  sphere which he made to imitate the motions of the sun, the moon and
  the five planets in the heavens. Cicero actually saw this contrivance
  and describes it (_De Rep._ i. c. 14, §§ 21-22).

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The _editio princeps_ of the works of Archimedes, with
  the commentary of Eutocius, is that printed at Basel, in 1544, in
  Greek and Latin, by Hervagius. D. Rivault's edition (Paris, 1615) gave
  the enunciations in Greek and the proofs in Latin somewhat retouched.
  A Latin version of them was published by Isaac Barrow in 1675 (London,
  4to); Nicolas Tartaglia published in Latin the treatises on _Centres
  of Gravity_, on the _Quadrature of the Parabola_, on the _Measurement
  of the Circle_, and on _Floating Bodies_, i. (Venice, 1543); Trojanus
  Curtius published the two books on _Floating Bodies_ in 1565 after
  Tartaglia's death; Frederic Commandine edited the Aldine edition of
  1558, 4to, which contains _Circuli Dimensio_, _De Lineis Spiralibus_,
  _Quadratura Paraboles_, _De Conoidibus et Spheroidibus_, and _De
  numero Arenae_; and in 1565 the same mathematician published the two
  books _De iis quae vehuntur in aqua_. J. Torelli's monumental edition
  of the works with the commentaries of Eutocius, published at Oxford in
  1792, folio, remained the best Greek text until the definitive text
  edited, with Eutocius' commentaries, Latin translation, &c., by J.L.
  Heiberg (Leipzig, 1880-1881) superseded it. The _Arenarius_ and
  _Dimensio Circuli_, with Eutocius' commentary on the latter, were
  edited by Wallis with Latin translation and notes in 1678 (Oxford),
  and the _Arenarius_ was also published in English by George Anderson
  (London, 1784), with useful notes and illustrations. The first modern
  translation of the works is the French edition published by F. Peyrard
  (Paris, 1808, 2 vols. 8vo.). A valuable German translation with notes,
  by E. Nizze, was published at Stralsund in 1824. There is a complete
  edition in modern notation by T.L. Heath (_The Works of Archimedes_,
  Cambridge, 1897). On Archimedes himself, see Plutarch's _Life of
  Marcellus_.     (T. L. H.)