ARCHIDAMUS, the name of five kings of Sparta, of the Eurypontid house.

1. The son and successor of Anaxidamus. His reign, which began soon
after the close of the second Messenian War, is said to have been quiet
and uneventful (Pausanias iii. 7. 6).

2. The son of Zeuxidamus, reigned 476-427 B.C. (but see LEOTYCHIDES). He
succeeded his grandfather Leotychides upon the banishment of the latter,
his father having already died. His coolness and presence of mind are
said to have saved the Spartan state from destruction on the occasion of
the great earthquake of 464 (Diodorus xi. 63; Plutarch, _Cimon_, 16),
but this story must be regarded as at least doubtful. He was a friend of
Pericles and a man of prudence and moderation. During the negotiations
which preceded the Peloponnesian War he did his best to prevent, or at
least to postpone, the inevitable struggle, but was overruled by the war
party. He invaded Attica at the head of the Peloponnesian forces in the
summers of 431, 430 and 428, and in 429 conducted operations against
Plataea. He died probably in 427, certainly before the summer of 426,
when we find his son Agis on the throne.

  Herod, vi. 71; Thuc. i. 79-iii. 1; Plut. _Pericles_, 29. 33; Diodorus
  xi. 48-xii. 52.

3. The son and successor of Agesilaus II., reigned 360-338 B.C. During
his father's later years he proved himself a brave and capable officer.
In 371 he led the relief force which was sent to aid the survivors of
the battle of Leuctra. Four years later he captured Caryae, ravaged the
territory of the Parrhasii and defeated the Arcadians, Argives and
Messenians in the "tearless battle," so called because the victory did
not cost the Spartans a single life. In 364, however, he sustained a
severe reverse in attempting to relieve a besieged Spartan garrison at
Cromnus in south-western Arcadia. He showed great heroism in the defence
of Sparta against Epaminondas immediately before the battle of Mantineia
(362). He supported the Phocians during the Sacred War (355-346), moved,
no doubt, largely by the hatred of Thebes which he had inherited from
his father; he also led the Spartan forces in the conflicts with the
Thebans and their allies which arose out of the Spartan attempt to break
up the city of Megalopolis. Finally he was sent with a mercenary army to
Italy to protect the Tarentines against the attacks of Lucanians or
Messapians; he fell together with the greater part of his force at
Mandonion[1] on the same day as that on which the battle of Chaeronea
was fought.

  Xen. _Hell._ v. 4, vi. 4, vii. 1. 4, 5; Plut. _Agis_, 3, _Camillus_,
  19, _Agesilaus._ 25, 33, 34, 40; Pausanias iii. 10, vi. 4; Diodorus
  xv. 54, 72, xvi. 24, 39, 59, 62, 88.

4. The son of Eudamidas I., grandson of Archidamus III. The dates of his
accession and death are unknown. In 294 B.C. he was defeated at
Mantineia by Demetrius Poliorcetes, who invaded Laconia, gained a second
victory close to Sparta, and was on the point of taking the city itself
when he was called away by the news of the successes of Lysimachus and
Ptolemy in Asia Minor and Cyprus.

  Plut. _Agis_, 3, _Demetrius_, 35; Pausanias, i. 13. 6, vii. 8. 5;
  Niese, _Gesch. der griech. u. makedon. Slaalen_, i. 363.

5. The son of Eudamidas II., grandson of Archidamus IV., brother of Agis
IV. On his brother's murder he fled to Messenia (241 B.C.). In 227 he
was recalled by Cleomenes III., who was then reigning without a
colleague, but shortly after his return he was assassinated. Polybius
accuses Cleomenes of the murder, but Plutarch is probably right in
saying that it was the work of those who had caused the death of Agis,
and feared his brother's vengeance.

  Plutarch, _Cleomenes_, i. 5; Polybius v. 37, viii. I; Niese, _op.
  cit._ ii. 304, 311.     (M. N. T.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] So Plut. _Agis_, 3 (all MSS.). Following Cellarius, some
    authorities read Manduria or Mandyrium.