ARCHANGEL (ARCHANGELSK), chief town of the government of Archangel,
Russia, at the head of the delta of the Dvina, on the right bank of the
river, in lat. 64° 32' N. and long. 40° 33' E. Pop. (1867) 19,936;
(1897) 20,933. As early as the 10th century, if not earlier, the
Norsemen frequented this part of the world (Bjarmeland) on trading
expeditions; the best-known is that made by Ottar or Othere between 880
and 900 and described (or translated) by Alfred the Great, king of
England. The modern town dates, however, from the visit of the English
voyager, Richard Chancellor, in 1553. An English factory was erected on
the lower Dvina soon after that date, and in 1584 a fort was built,
around which the town grew up. Archangel was for long the only seaport
of Russia (or Muscovy). The tsar Boris Godunov (1598-1605) threw the
trade open to all nations; and the chief participants in it were
England, Holland and Germany. In 1668-1684 the great bazaar and trading
hall was built, principally by Tatar prisoners. In 1691-1700 the exports
to England averaged £112,210 annually. After Peter the Great made St
Petersburg the capital of his dominions (1702), he placed Archangel
under vexatious commercial disabilities, and consequently its trade
declined. In 1762 it was granted the same privileges as St Petersburg,
and since then it has gradually recovered its former prosperity. It is
the seat of a bishop, and has a cathedral (1709-1743), a museum, the
monastery of the Archangel Michael (whence the city gets its name), an
ecclesiastical seminary, a school of navigation and a naval hospital.
Linen, leather, canvas, cordage, mats, tallow, potash and beer are
manufactured. There is a lively trade with St Petersburg, and the
sea-borne exports, which consist chiefly of timber, flax, linseed, oats,
flour, pitch, tar, skins and mats, amount in value to about 1½ millions
sterling annually (82½ % for timber), but the imports (mostly fish) are
worth only about £200,000. A fish fair is held every year on the 1st
(15th) of September. Archangel communicates with the interior of Russia
by river and canal, and has a railway line (522 m.) to Yaroslavl. The
harbour, deepened to 18¼ ft., is about a mile below the city, and is
accessible from May to October. About 12 m. lower down there are a
government dockyard and merchants' warehouses. A new military harbour,
Alexandrovsk or Port Catherine, has been made on Catherine
(Ekaterininsk) Bay, on the Murman coast of the Kola peninsula. The
shortest day at Archangel has only 3 hrs. 12 min., the longest 21 hrs.
48 min. of daylight.