ARCHIAC, ÉTIENNE JULES ADOLPHE DESMIER DE SAINT SIMON, VICOMTE D'
(1802-1868), French geologist and palaeontologist, was born at Reims on
the 24th of September 1802. He was educated in the Military School of St
Cyr, and served for nine years as a cavalry officer until 1830, when he
retired from the service. Prior to this he had published an historical
romance; but now geology came to occupy his chief attention. In his
earlier scientific works, which date from 1835, he described the
Tertiary and Cretaceous formations of France, Belgium and England, and
dealt especially with the distribution of fossils geographically and in
sequence. Later on he investigated the Carboniferous, Devonian and
Silurian formations. His great work, _Histoire des progrès de la
géologie_, 1834-1859, was published in 8 volumes at Paris (1847-1860).
In 1853 the Wollaston Medal of the Geological Society was awarded to
him. In the same year, with Jules Haime (1824-1856), he published a
monograph on the Nummulitic formation of India. In 1857 he was elected a
member of the Academy of Sciences, and in 1861 he was appointed
professor of palaeontology in the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris.
Of later works his _Paléontologie stratigraphique_, in 3 vols.
(1864-1865); his _Géologie et paléontologie_ (1866); and his
palaeontological contributions to de Tchihatcheff's _Asie mineure_
(1866), may be specially mentioned.

He died on the 24th of December 1868.

  See _Notice sur les travaux scientifiques du vicomte d'Archiac_, par
  A. Gaudry (Meulan, 1874); _Extrait du Bull. Soc. Géol. de France_,
  ser. 3, t. ii. p. 230 (1874).