ARCHDUKE (Lat. _archidux_, Ger. _Erzherzog_,) a title peculiar now to
the Austrian royal family. According to Selden it denotes "an excellency
or pre-eminence only, not a superiority or power over other dukes, as in
archbishop it doth over other bishops." Yet in this latter sense it
would seem to have been assumed by Bruno of Saxony, archbishop of
Cologne, and duke of Lorraine (953-965), when he divided his duchy into
the dukedoms of Upper and Lower Lorraine. The designation was, however,
exceedingly rare during the middle ages. The title of archduke of
Lorraine ceased with the circumstances which had produced it. The later
dynasties of Brabant and Lorraine, when these fiefs became hereditary,
bore only the title of duke. The house of Habsburg, therefore, did not
acquire this title with the inheritance of the dukes of Lorraine. Nor
does it occur in any of the charters granted to the dukes of Austria by
the emperors; though in that creating the first duke of Austria the
_archiduces palatii, i.e._ the principal dukes of the court, are
mentioned. The "Archidux Austriae, seu Austriae inferioris" is spoken of
by Abbot Rudolph (d. 1138) in his chronicles of the abbey of St Trond
(_Gesta Abbatum Trudonensium_) but this is no more than a rhetorical
flourish, and the title of "archduke palatine" (Pfalz-Erzherzog) was, in
fact, assumed first by Duke Rudolph IV. (d. 1365), and was one of the
rights and privileges included in his famous forgery of the year 1358,
the _privilegium maius_, which purported to have been bestowed by the
emperor Frederick I. on the dukes of Austria in extension of the genuine
_privilegium minus_ of 1156, granted to the margrave Henry II. Rudolph
IV. used the title on his seals and charters till he was compelled to
desist by the emperor Charles IV. The title was also assumed for a time,
probably on the strength of the _privilegium maius_, by Duke Ernest of
Styria (d. 1424); but it did not legally belong to the house of
Habsburg until 1453, when Duke Ernest's son, the emperor Frederick III.
(Frederick V., duke of Styria and Carinthia, 1424-1493, of Austria,
1463-1493), confirmed the _privilegium maius_ and conferred the title of
archduke of Austria on his son Maximilian and his heirs. The title
archduke (or archduchess) is now borne by all members of the Austrian
imperial house.

  See John Selden, _Titles of Honor_ (1672); Antonius Matthaeus, _De
  nobilititate, de principibus, deducibus, &c., libriquatuor_ (Amsterdam
  and Leiden, 1696, lib. i. cap. 6); Pfeffel, _Abrégé chronologique de
  l'hist, el du droit public d'Allemagne_ (Paris, 1766); Brinckmeier,
  _Glossarium diplomaticum, &c._ (1850-1863, 2 vols.); J.F. Joachim,
  "Abhandlung von dem Titel 'Erzherzog,' welchen das Haus Oesterreich
  fuhrt." in _Prufende Gesellschaft zu Halle, 7_; F. Wachter, art.
  "Erzherzog," in _Allgem. Encykl. der Wissenschiften u. Kunste_ (1842,
  pub. by Ersch and Gruber); A. Huber, _Ueber die Entstehungszeit der
  oesterreichischen Freiheitsbriefe_ (Vienna, 1860); W. Erben, _Das
  Privilegium Friedrichs I. für das Herzogtum Österreich_ (Vienna,
  1902).