ARCHENHOLZ, JOHANN WILHELM VON (1743-1812), German historian, was born
at Langfuhr, a suburb of Danzig, on the 3rd of September 1743. From the
Berlin Cadet school he passed into the Prussian army at the age of
sixteen, and took part in the last campaigns of the Seven Years' War.
Retiring from military service, on account of his wounds, with the rank
of captain in 1763, he travelled for sixteen years and visited nearly
all the countries of Europe, and resided in England for ten years
(1769-1779). Returning to Germany in 1780, he obtained a lay canonry at
the cathedral of Magdeburg, and immediately entered upon a literary
career by publishing the periodical _Litteratur- und Völkerkunde_
(Leipzig, 1782-1791). This was followed in 1785 by _England und Italien_
(2nd ed., Leipzig, 1787), in which he gives a remarkably unprejudiced
appreciation of English political and social institutions. Between 1789
and 1798 he published his _Annalen der britischen Geschichte_ (20 vols).
But the work by which he is best known to fame is his brilliantly
written history of the Seven Years' War, _Geschichte des siebenjährigen
Krieges_ (first published in the _Berliner historisches Taschenbuch_ of
1787, and later in 2 vols., Berlin, 1793; 13th ed., Leipzig, 1892). This
work, though as regards the main facts and details it only follows other
writers, is still a useful source of information upon the epoch with
which it deals. In 1792 Archenholz removed to Hamburg, and there, from
1792 to 1812, edited the journal _Minerva_, which had a great reputation
for its literary, historical and political information. Archenholz died
at his country seat, Oyendorf, near Hamburg, on the 28th of February
1812.