AREOI, or AREOITI, a secret society which originated in Tahiti and later
extended its influence to other South Pacific islands. To its ranks both
sexes were admitted. The society was primarily of a religious character.
Members styled themselves descendants of Oro-Tetifa, the Polynesian god,
and were divided into seven or more grades, each having its
characteristic tattooing. Chiefs were at once qualified for the highest
grade, but ordinary members attained promotion only through initiatory
rites. The Areois enjoyed great privileges, and were considered as
depositaries of knowledge and as mediators between God and man. They
were feared, too, as ministers of the taboo and were entitled to
pronounce a kind of excommunication for offences against its rules. The
chief religious purpose of the society was the worship of the generative
powers of nature, and the ritual and ceremonies of initiation were
grossly licentious. But the Areois were also a social force. They aimed
at communism in all things. The women members were common property; the
period of cohabitation was limited to three days, and the female Areois
were bound by oath at initiation to strangle at birth any child born to
them. If, however, the infant was allowed to survive half an hour only,
it was spared; but to have the right of keeping it the mother must find
a male Areoi willing to adopt it. The Areois travelled about, devoting
their whole time to feasting, dancing (the chief dance of the women
being the grossly indecent _Timorodee_ mentioned by Captain Cook), and
debauchery, varied by elaborate realistic stage presentments of the
lives and loves of gods and legendary heroes.