ARETHUSA, in Greek mythology, a nymph who gave her name to a spring in
Elis and to another in the island of Ortygia near Syracuse. According to
Pausanias (v. 7. 2), Alpheus, a mighty hunter, was enamoured of
Arethusa, one of the retinue of Artemis; Arethusa fled to Ortygia, where
she was changed into a spring; Alpheus, in the form of a river, made his
way beneath the sea, and united his waters with those of the spring. In
Ovid (_Metam._ v. 572 foll.), Arethusa, while bathing in the Alpheus,
was seen and pursued by the river god in human form; Artemis changed her
into a spring, which, flowing underground, emerged at Ortygia. In the
earlier form of the legend, it is Artemis, not Arethusa, who is the
object of the god's affections, and escapes by smearing her face with
mire, so that he fails to recognize her (see L.R. Farnell, _Cults of the
Greek States_, ii. p. 428). The probable origin of the story is the part
traditionally taken in the foundation of Syracuse by the Iamidae of
Olympia, who identified the spring Arethusa with their own river
Alpheus, and the nymph with Artemis Alpheiaia, who was worshipped at
Ortygia. The subterranean passage of the Alpheus in the upper part of
its course (confirmed by modern explorers), and the freshness of the
water of Arethusa in spite of its proximity to the sea, led to the
belief that it was the outlet of the river. Further, according to Strabo
(vi. p. 270), during the sacrifice of oxen at Olympia the waters of
Arethusa were disturbed, and a cup thrown into the Alpheus would
reappear in Ortygia. In Virgil (_Ecl_. x. 1) Arethusa is addressed as a
divinity of poetical inspiration, like one of the Muses, who were
themselves originally nymphs of springs.

  For Arethusa on Syracusan coins, see B.V. Head, _Historia Numorum_,
  pp. 151, 155.