ARGENTINA, or the ARGENTINE REPUBLIC (officially, _Republica
Argentina_), a country occupying the greater part of the southern
extremity of South America. It is of wedge shape, extending from 21° 55'
S. to the most southerly point of the island of Tierra del Fuego in 55°
2' 30" S., while its extremes of longitude are 53° 40' on the Brazilian
frontier and 73° 17' 30" W. on the Chilean frontier. Its length from
north to south is 2285 statute miles, and its greatest width about 930
m. It is the second largest political division of the continent, having
an area of 1,083,596 sq. m. (Gotha measurement). It is bounded N. by
Bolivia and Paraguay, E. by Paraguay, Brazil, Uruguay and the Atlantic,
W. by Chile, and S. by the converging lines of the Atlantic and Chile.

_Boundaries._--At different times Argentina has been engaged in disputes
over boundary lines with every one of her neighbours, that with Chile
being only settled in 1902. Beginning at the estuary of the Rio de la
Plata, the boundary line ascends the Uruguay river, on the eastern side
of the strategically important island of Martin García, to the mouth of
the Pequiry, thence under the award of President Grover Cleveland in
1894 up that small river to its source and in a direct line to the
source of the Santo Antonio, a small tributary of the Iguassú, thence
down the Santo Antonio and Iguassú to the upper Paraná, which forms the
southern boundary of Paraguay. From the confluence of the upper Paraná
and Paraguay the line ascends the latter to the mouth of the Pilcomayo,
which river, under the award of President R.B. Hayes in 1878, forms the
boundary between Argentina and Paraguay from the Paraguay river
north-west to the Bolivian frontier. In accordance with the
Argentine-Bolivian treaty of 1889 the boundary line between these
republics continues up the Pilcomayo to the 22nd parallel, thence west
to the Tarija river, which it follows down to the Bermejo, thence up the
latter to its source, and westerly through the Quiaca ravine and across
to a point on the San Juan river opposite Esmoraca. From this point it
ascends the San Juan south and west to the Cerro de Granadas, and thence
south-west to Cerro Incahuasi and Cerro Zapalegui on the Chilean
frontier. The boundary with Chile, extending across more than 32° lat.,
had been the cause of disputes for many years, which at times led to
costly preparations for war. The debts of the two nations resulted
largely from this one cause. In 1881 a treaty was signed which provided
that the boundary line should follow the highest crests of the Andes
forming the watershed as far south as the 52nd parallel, thence east to
the 70th meridian and south-east to Cape Dungeness at the eastern
entrance to the Straits of Magellan. Crossing the Straits the line
should follow the meridian of 68° 44', south to Beagle Channel, and
thence east to the Atlantic, giving Argentina the eastern part of the
Tierra del Fuego and Staten Island. By this agreement Argentina was
confirmed in the possession of the greater part of Patagonia, while
Chile gained control of the Straits of Magellan, much adjacent territory
on the north, the larger part of Tierra del Fuego and all the
neighbouring islands south and west.

When the attempt was made to mark this boundary the commissioners were
unable to agree on a line across the Puna de Atacama in the north, where
parallel ranges enclosing a high arid plateau without any clearly
defined drainage to the Atlantic or Pacific, gave an opportunity for
conflicting claims. In the south the broken character of the Cordillera,
pierced in places by large rivers flowing into the Pacific and having
their upper drainage basins on the eastern side of the line of highest
crests, gave rise to unforeseen and very difficult questions. Finally,
under a convention of the 17th of April 1896, these conflicting claims
were submitted to arbitration. In 1899 a mixed commission with Hon. W.I.
Buchanan, United States minister at Buenos Aires, serving as arbitrator,
reached a decision on the Atacama line north of 26° 52' 45" S. lat.,
which was a compromise though it gave the greater part of the territory
to Argentina. The line starts at the intersection of the 23rd parallel
with the 67th meridian and runs south-westerly and southerly to the
mountain and volcano summits of Rincón, Socompa, Llullaillaco, Azufre,
Aguas Blancas and Sierra Nevada, thence to the initial point of the
British award. (See _Geogr. Jour._, 1899, xiv. 322-323.) The line south
of 26° 52' 45" S. lat. had been located by the commissioners of the two
republics with the exception of four sections. These were referred to
the arbitration of Queen Victoria, and, after a careful survey under the
direction of Sir Thomas H. Holdich, the award was rendered by King
Edward VII. in 1902. (See _Geogr. Jour._, 1903, xxi. 45-50.) In the
first section the line starts from a pillar erected in the San Francisco
pass, about 26° 50' S. lat., and follows the water-parting southward to
the highest peak of the Tres Cruces mountains in 27° 0' 45" S. lat., 68°
49' 5" W. long. In the second, the line runs from 40° 2' S. lat., 71°
40' 36" W. long., along the water-parting to the southern termination of
the Cerro Perihueico in the valley of the Huahum river, thence across
that river, 71° 40' 36" W. long., and along the water-parting around the
upper basin of the Huahum to a junction with the line previously
determined. In the third and longest section, the line starts from a
pillar erected in the Perez Rosales pass, near Lake Nahuel-Huapi, and
follows the water-parting southward to the highest point of Mt.
Tronador, and thence in a very tortuous course along local
water-partings and across the Chilean rivers Manso, Puelo, Fetaleufu,
Palena, Pico and Aisen, and the lakes Buenos Aires, Pueyrredón and San
Martin, to avoid the inclusion of Argentine settlements within Chilean
territory, to the Cerro Fitzroy and continental water-parting north-west
of Lake Viedma, between 49° and 50° S. lat. The northern half of this
line does not run far from the 72nd meridian, except in 44° 30' S. where
it turns eastward nearly a degree to include the upper valley of the
Frias river in Chilean territory, but south of the 49th parallel it
curves westward to give Argentina sole possession of lakes Viedma and
Argentino. The fourth section, which was made particularly difficult of
solution by the extension inland of the Pacific coast inlets and sounds
and by the Chilean colonies located there, was adjusted by running the
line eastward from the point of divergence in 50° 50' S. lat. along the
Sierra Baguales, thence south and south-east to the 52nd parallel,
crossing several streams and following the crests of the Cerro Cazador.
The Chilean settlement of Ultima Esperanza (Last Hope), over which there
had been much controversy, remains under Chilean jurisdiction.

  _Physical Geography._--For purposes of surface description, Argentina
  may be divided primarily into three great divisions--the mountainous
  zone and tablelands of the west, extending the full length of the
  republic; the great plains of the east, extending from the Pilcomayo
  to the Rio Negro; and the desolate, arid steppes of Patagonia. The
  first covers from one-third to one-fourth of the width of the country
  between the Bolivian frontier and the Rio Negro, and comprises the
  elevated Cordilleras and their plateaus, with flanking ranges and
  spurs toward the east. In the extreme north, extending southward from
  the great Bolivian highlands, there are several parallel ranges, the
  most prominent of which are: the Sierra de Santa Catalina, from which
  the detached Cachi, Gulumpaji and Famatina ranges project southward;
  and the Sierra de Santa Victoria, south of which are the Zenta,
  Aconquija, Ambato and Ancaste ranges. These minor ranges, excepting
  the Zenta, are separated from the Andean masses by comparatively low
  depressions and are usually described as distinct ranges;
  topographically, however, they seem to form a continuation of the
  ranges running southward from the Santa Victoria and forming the
  eastern rampart of the great central plateau of which the Puna de
  Atacama covers a large part. The elevated plateaus between these
  ranges are semi-arid and inhospitable, and are covered with extensive
  saline basins, which become lagoons in the wet season and morasses or
  dry salt-pans in the dry season. These saline basins extend down to
  the lower terraces of Córdoba, Mendoza and La Pampa. Flanking this
  great widening of the Andes on the south-east are the three short
  parallel ranges of Córdoba, belonging to another and older formation.
  North of them is the great saline depression, known as the "salinas
  grandes," 643 ft. above sea-level, where it is crossed by a railway;
  north-east is another extensive saline basin enclosing the "Mar
  Chiquita" (of Córdoba) and the morasses into which the waters of the
  Rio Saladillo disappear; and on the north are the more elevated
  plains, partly saline, of western Córdoba, which separate this
  isolated group of mountains from the Andean spurs of Rioja and San
  Luis. The eastern ranges parallel to the Andes are here broken into
  detached extensions and spurs, which soon disappear in the elevated
  western pampas, and the Andes contract south of Aconcagua to a single
  range, which descends gradually to the great plains of La Pampa and
  Neuquen. The lower terrace of this great mountainous region, with
  elevations ranging from 1000 to 1500 ft., is in reality the western
  margin of the great Argentine plain, and may be traced from Oran (1017
  ft.) near the Bolivian frontier southward through Tucumán (1476 ft.),
  Frias (1129 ft.), Córdoba (1279 ft.), Rio Cuarto (1358 ft.), Paunero
  (1250 ft.), and thence westward and southward through still unsettled
  regions to the Rio Negro at the confluence of the Neuquen and Limay.

  The Argentine part of the great La Plata plain extends from the
  Pilcomayo south to the Rio Negro, and from the lower terraces of the
  Andes eastward to the Uruguay and Atlantic. In the north the plain is
  known as the Gran Chaco, and includes the country between the
  Pilcomayo and Salado del Norte and an extensive depression immediately
  north of the latter river, believed to be the undisturbed bottom of
  the ancient Pampean sea. The northern part of the Gran Chaco is partly
  wooded and swampy, and as the slope eastward is very gentle and the
  rivers much obstructed by sand bars, floating trees and vegetation,
  large areas are regularly flooded during rainy seasons. South of the
  Bermejo the land is more elevated and drier, though large depressions
  covered with marshy lagoons are to be found, similar to those farther
  north. The forests here are heavier. Still farther south and
  south-west there are open grassy plains and large areas covered with
  salt-pans. The general elevation of the Chaco varies from 600 to 800
  ft. above sea-level. The Argentine "mesopotamia," between the Paraná
  and Uruguay rivers, belongs in great measure to this same region,
  being partly wooded, flat and swampy in the north (Corrientes), but
  higher and undulating in the south (Entre Rios). The Misiones
  territory of the extreme north-east belongs to the older highlands of
  Brazil, is densely wooded, and has ranges of hills sometimes rising to
  a height of 1000 to 1300 ft.

  The remainder of the great Argentine plain is the treeless, grassy
  _pampa_ (Quichua for "level spaces"), apparently a dead level, but in
  reality rising gradually from the Atlantic westward toward the Andes.
  Evidence of this is to be found in the altitudes of the stations on
  the Buenos Aires and Pacific railway running a little north of west
  across the pampas to Mendoza. The average elevation of Buenos Aires is
  about 65 ft.; of Mercedes, 70 m. westward, 132 ft.; of Junín (160 m.),
  267 ft.; and of Paunero (400 m.) it is 1250 ft., showing an average
  rise of about 3 ft. in a mile. The apparently uniform level of the
  pampas is much broken along its southern margin by the Tandil and
  Ventana sierras, and by ranges of hills and low mountains in the
  southern and western parts of the territory of La Pampa. Extensive
  depressions also are found, some of which are subject to inundations,
  as along the lower Salado in Buenos Aires and along the lower courses
  of the Colorado and Negro. In the extreme west, which is as yet but
  slightly explored and settled, there is an extensive depressed area,
  largely saline in character, which drains into lakes and morasses,
  having no outlet to the ocean. The rainfall is under 6 in. annually,
  but the drainage from the eastern slopes of the Andes is large enough
  to meet the loss from evaporation and keep these inland lakes from
  drying up. At an early period this depressed area drained southward to
  the Colorado, and the bed of the old outlet can still be traced. The
  rivers belonging to this inland drainage system are the Vermejo, San
  Juan and Desaguadero, with their affluents, and their southward flow
  can be traced from about 28° S. lat. to the great lagoons and morasses
  between 36° and 37° S. lat. in the western part of La Pampa territory.
  Some of the principal affluents are the Vinchina and Jachal, or
  Zanjon, which flow into the Vermejo, the Patos, which flows into the
  San Juan, and the Mendoza, Tunuyan and Diamante which flow into the
  Desaguadero, all of these being Andean snow-fed rivers. The
  Desaguadero also receives the outflow of the Laguna Bebedero, an
  intensely saline lake of western San Luis. The lower course of the
  Desaguadero is known as the Salado because of the brackish character
  of its water. Another considerable river flowing into the same great
  morass is the Atuel, which rises in the Andes not far south of the
  Diamante. (A description of the Patagonian part of Argentina will be
  found under PATAGONIA.)

  _Rivers and Lakes._--The hydrography of Argentina is of the simplest
  character. The three great rivers that form the La Plata system--the
  Paraguay, Paraná and Uruguay--have their sources in the highlands of
  Brazil and flow southward through a great continental depression, two
  of them forming eastern boundary lines, and one of them, the Paraná,
  flowing across the eastern part of the republic. The northern part of
  Argentina, therefore, drains eastward from the mountains to these
  rivers, except where some great inland depression gives rise to a
  drainage having no outlet to the sea, and except, also, in the
  "mesopotamia" region, where small streams flow westward into the
  Paraná and eastward into the Uruguay. The largest of the rivers
  through which Argentina drains into the Plata system are the
  Pilcomayo, which rises in Bolivia and flows south-east along the
  Argentine frontier for about 400 m.; the Bermejo, which rises on the
  northern frontier and flows south-east into the Paraguay; and the
  Salado del Norte (called Rio del Jura-mento in its upper course),
  which rises on the high mountain slopes of western Salta and flows
  south-east into the Paraná. Another river of this class is the
  Carcarañal, about 300 m. long, formed by the confluence of the Tercero
  and Cuarto, whose sources are in the Sierra de Córdoba; it flows
  eastward across the pampas, and discharges into the Paraná at Gaboto,
  about 40 m. above Rosario. Other small rivers rising in the Córdoba
  sierras are the Primero and Segundo, which flow into the lagoons of
  north-east Córdoba, and the Quinto, which flows south-easterly into
  the lagoons and morasses of southern Córdoba. The Luján rises near
  Mercedes, province of Buenos Aires, is about 150 m. long, and flows
  north-easterly into the Paraná delta. Many smaller streams discharge
  into the Paraguay and Paraná from the west, some of them wholly
  dependent upon the rains, and drying up during long droughts. The
  Argentine "mesopotamia" is well watered by a large number of small
  streams flowing north and west into the Paraná, and east into the
  Uruguay. The largest of these are the Corrientes, Feliciano and
  Gualeguay of the western slope, and the Aguapey and Miriñay of the
  eastern. None of the tributaries of the La Plata system thus far
  mentioned is navigable except the lower Pilcomayo and Bermejo for a
  few miles. These Chaco rivers are obstructed by sand bars and snags,
  which could be removed only by an expenditure of money unwarranted by
  the present population and traffic. In the southern pampa region there
  are many small streams, flowing into the La Plata estuary and the
  Atlantic; most of these are unknown by name outside the republic. The
  largest and only important river is the Salado del Sud, which rises in
  the north-west corner of the province of Buenos Aires and flows
  south-east for a distance of 360 m. into the bay of Samborombon. On
  the southern margin of the pampas are the Colorado and Negro, both
  large, navigable rivers flowing entirely across the republic from the
  Andes to the Atlantic. Many of the rivers of Argentina, as implied by
  their names (Salado and Saladillo), are saline or brackish in
  character, and are of slight use in the pastoral and agricultural
  industries of the country. The lakes of Argentina are exceptionally
  numerous, although comparatively few are large enough to merit a name
  on the ordinary general map. They vary from shallow, saline lagoons in
  the north-western plateaus, to great, picturesque, snow-fed lakes in
  the Andean foothills of Patagonia. The province of Buenos Aires has
  more than 600 lakes, the great majority small, and some brackish. The
  La Pampa territory also is dotted with small lakes. The Bebedero, in
  San Luis, and Porongos, in Córdoba, and others, are shallow, saline
  lakes which receive the drainage of a considerable area and have no
  outlet. The large saline Mar Chiquita, of Córdoba, is fed from the
  Sierra de Córdoba and has no outlet. In the northern part of
  Gorrientes there is a large area of swamps and shallow lagoons which
  are believed to be slowly drying up.

  _Harbours._--Although having a great extent of coast-line, Argentina
  has but few really good harbours. The two most frequented by
  ocean-going vessels are Buenos Aires and Ensenada (La Plata), both of
  which have been constructed at great expense to overcome natural
  disadvantages. Perhaps the best natural harbour of the republic is
  that of Bahia Blanca, a large bay of good depth, sheltered by islands,
  and 534 m. by sea south of Buenos Aires; here the government is
  building a naval station and port called Puerto Militar or Puerto
  Belgrano, and little dredging is needed to render the harbour
  accessible to the largest ocean-going vessels. About 100 m. south of
  Bahia Blanca is the sheltered bay of San Bias, which may become of
  commercial importance, and between the 42nd and 43rd parallels are the
  land-locked bays of San José and Nueva (Golfo Nuevo)--the first as yet
  unused; on the latter is Puerto Madryn, 838 m. from Buenos Aires, the
  outlet for the Welsh colony of Chubut. Other small harbours on the
  lower Patagonian coast are not prominent, owing to lack of population.
  An occasional Argentine steamer visits these ports in the interests of
  colonists. The beet-known among them are Puerto Deseado (Port Desire)
  at the mouth of the Deseado river (1253 m.), Santa Cruz, at the mouth
  of the Santa Cruz river (1481 m.), and Ushuaia, on Beagle Channel,
  Tierra del Fuego. North of Buenos Aires, on the Paraná river, is the
  port of Rosario, the outlet for a rich agricultural district, ranking
  next to the federal capital in importance. Other river ports, of less
  importance, are Concordia on the Uruguay river, San Nicolás and
  Campana on the Paraná river, Santa Fé on the Salado, a few miles from
  the Paraná, the city of Paraná on the Paraná river, and Gualeguay on
  the Gualeguay river.

  _Geology._--The Pampas of Argentina are generally covered by loess.
  The Cordillera, which bounds them on the west, is formed of folded
  beds, while the Sierras which rise in their midst, consist mainly of
  gneiss, granite and schist. In the western Sierras, which are more or
  less closely attached to the main chain of the Cordillera, Cambrian
  and Silurian fossils have been found at several places. These older
  beds are overlaid, especially in the western part of the country, by a
  sandstone series which contains thin seams of coal and many remains of
  plants. At Bajo de Velis, in San Luis, the plants belong to the
  "Glossopteris flora," which is so widely spread in South Africa, India
  and Australia, and the beds are correlated with the Karharbári series
  of India (Permian or Permo-Carboni-ferous). Elsewhere the plants
  generally indicate a higher horizon and are considered to correspond
  with the Rhaetic of Europe. Jurassic beds are known only in the
  Cordillera itself, and the Cretaceous beds, which occur in the west of
  the country, are of fresh-water origin. As far west, therefore, as the
  Cordillera, there is no evidence that any part of the region was ever
  beneath the sea in Mesozoic times, and the plant-remains indicate a
  land connexion with Africa. This view is supported by Neumayr's
  comparison of Jurassic faunas throughout the world. The Lower Tertiary
  consists largely of reddish sandstones resting upon the old rocks of
  the Cordillera and of the Sierras. Towards the east they lie at a
  lower level; but in the Andes they reach a height of nearly 10,000
  ft., and are strongly folded, showing that the elevation of the chain
  was not completed until after their deposition. The marine facies of
  the later Tertiaries is confined to the neighbourhood of the coast,
  and was probably formed after the elevation of the Andes; but inland,
  fresh-water deposits of this period are met with, especially in
  Patagonia. Contemporaneous volcanic rocks are associated with the
  Ordovician beds and with the Rhaetic sandstones in several places.
  During the Tertiary period the great volcanoes of the Andes were
  formed, and there were smaller eruptions in the Sierras. The principal
  rocks are andesites, but trachytes and basalts are also common. Great
  masses of granite, syenite and diorite were intruded at this period,
  and send tongues even into the andesitic tuffs.

  Silver, gold, lead and copper ores occur in many localities. They are
  found chiefly in the neighbourhood of the eruptive masses of the hilly
  regions. (See also ANDES.)[1]

  _Climate._--The great extent of Argentina in latitude--about 33°--and
  its range in altitude from sea-level westward to the permanently
  snow-covered peaks of the Andes, give it a highly diversified climate,
  which is further modified by prevailing winds and mountain barriers.
  The temperature and rainfall are governed by conditions different from
  those in corresponding latitudes of the northern hemisphere. Southern
  Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, for instance, although they correspond
  in latitude to Labrador, are made habitable and an excellent
  sheep-grazing country by the southerly equatorial current along the
  continental coast. The climate, however, is colder than the
  corresponding latitudes of western Europe, because of the prevailing
  westerly winds, chilled in crossing the Andes. In the extreme
  north-west an elevated region, whose aridity is caused by the
  "blanketing" influence of the eastern Andean ranges, extends southward
  to Mendoza. The northern part of the republic, east of the mountains,
  is subject to the oscillatory movements of the south-east trade winds,
  which cause a division of the year into wet and dry seasons. Farther
  south, in Patagonia, the prevailing wind is westerly, in which case
  the Andes again "blanket" an extensive region and deprive it of rain,
  turning it into an arid desolate steppe. Below this region, where the
  Andean barrier is low and broken, the moist westerly winds sweep over
  the land freely and give it a large rainfall, good pastures and a
  vigorous forest growth. If the republic be divided into sections by
  east and west lines, diversities of climate in the same latitude
  appear. In the extreme north a little over a degree and a half of
  territory lies within the torrid zone, extending from the Pilcomayo
  about 500 m. westward to the Chilean frontier; its eastern end is in
  the low, wooded plain of the Gran Chaco, where the mean annual
  temperature is 73° F., and the annual rainfall is 63 in.; but on the
  arid, elevated plateau at its western extremity the temperature falls
  below 57° F., and the rainfall has diminished to 2 in. The character
  of the soil changes from the alluvial lowlands of the Gran Chaco,
  covered with forests of palms and other tropical vegetation, to the
  sandy, saline wastes of the Puna de Atacama, almost barren of
  vegetation and overshadowed by permanently snow-crowned peaks.
  Between the 30th and 31st parallels, a region essentially sub-tropical
  in character, the temperature ranges from 66° on the eastern plains to
  62-5° in Córdoba and 64° F. on the higher, arid, sun-parched
  tablelands of San Juan. The rainfall, which varies between 39 and 47
  in. in Entre Rios, decreases to 27 in. in Córdoba and 2 in. in San
  Juan. The republic has a width of about 745 m. at this point,
  three-fourths of which is a comparatively level alluvial plain, and
  the remainder an arid plateau broken by mountain ranges. In the
  vicinity of Buenos Aires the climatic conditions vary very little from
  those of the pampa region; the mean annual temperature is about 63°
  (maximum 104°; minimum 32°), and the annual rainfall is 34 in.; snow
  is rarely seen. South of the pampa region, on the 40th parallel, the
  mean temperature varies only slightly in the 370 m. from the mouth of
  the Colorado to the Andes, ranging from 57° to 55°; but the rainfall
  increases from 8 in. on the coast to 16 in. on the east slope of the
  Cordillera. This section is near the northern border of the arid
  Patagonian steppes. In Tierra del Fuego (lat. 53° to 55°), the
  climatic conditions are in strong contrast to those of the north. Here
  the mean temperature is between 46° and 48° in summer and 36° and 38°
  in winter, rains are frequent, and snow falls every month in the year.
  The central and southern parts of the island and the neighbouring
  Staten Island are exceptionally rainy, the latter having 251½ rainy
  days in the year. The precipitation of rain, snow and hail is about 55
  in.

  [Illustration: Map of Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay.]

  The prevailing winds through this southern region are westerly, being
  moist below the 52nd parallel, and dry between it and the 40th
  parallel. In the north and on the pampas the north wind is hot and
  depressing, while the south wind is cool and refreshing. The north
  wind usually terminates with a thunderstorm or with a _pampero_, a
  cold south-west wind from the Andes which blows with great violence,
  causes a fall in temperature of 15° to 20°, and is most frequent from
  June to November--the southern winter and spring. In the Andean
  region, a dry, hot wind from the north or north-west, called the
  _Zonda_, blows with great intensity, especially in September-October,
  and causes much discomfort and suffering. It is followed by a cold
  south wind which often lowers the temperature 25°. The climate of the
  pampas is temperate and healthy, and is admirably suited to
  agricultural and pastoral pursuits. Its greatest defect is the cold
  southerly and westerly storms, which cause great losses in cattle and
  sheep. The Patagonian coast-line and mountainous region are also
  healthy, having a dry and bracing climate. In the north, however, the
  hot lowlands are malarial and unsuited to north European settlement,
  while the dry, elevated plateaus are celebrated for their healthiness,
  those of Catamarca having an excellent reputation as a sanatorium for
  sufferers from pulmonary and bronchial diseases.

  _Flora._--The flora of Argentina should be studied according to
  natural zones corresponding to the physical divisions of the
  country--the rich tropical and sub-tropical regions of the north, the
  treeless pampas of the centre, the desert steppes of the south, and
  the arid plateaus of the north-west. The vegetation of each region has
  its distinctive character, modified here and there by elevation,
  irrigation from mountain streams, and by the saline character of the
  soil. In the extreme south, where an Arctic vegetation is found, the
  pastures are rich, and the forests, largely of the Antarctic beech
  (_Fagus antarctica_), are vigorous wherever the rainfall is heavy. The
  greater part of Patagonia is comparatively barren and has no arboreal
  growth, except in the well-watered valleys of the Andean foothills.
  The water-courses and depressions of the shingly steppts afford
  pasturage sufficient for the guanaco, and in places support a thorny
  vegetation of low growth and starved appearance. The Antarctic beech
  and Winter's bark (_Drimys Winteri_) are found at intervals along the
  Andes to the northern limits of this zone. The pampas, which cover so
  large a part of the republic, have no native trees whatever, and no
  woods except the scrubby growth of the delta islands of the Paraná,
  and a fringe of low thorn-bushes along the Atlantic coast south to Mar
  Chiquita and south of the Tandil sierra, which, strictly speaking,
  does not belong to this region. The great plains are covered with
  edible grasses, divided into two classes, _pasto duro_ (hard grass)
  and _pasto blando_, or _tierno_ (soft grass)--the former tall, coarse,
  nutritious and suitable for horses and cattle, and the latter tender
  grasses and herbs, including clovers, suitable for sheep and cattle.
  The so-called "pampas-grass" (_Gynerium argenteum_) is not found at
  all on the dry lands, but in the wet grounds of the south and
  south-west. The _pasto duro_ is largely composed of the genera _Stipa_
  and _Melica_. In the dry, saline regions of the west and north-west,
  where the rainfall is slight, there are large thickets of low-growing,
  thorny bushes, poor in foliage. The predominating species is the
  chañar (_Gurliaca decorticans_), which produces an edible berry, and
  occurs from the Rio Negro to the northern limits of the republic. Huge
  cacti are also characteristic of this region. On the lower slopes of
  the Andes are found oak, beech, cedar, Winter's bark, pine (_Araucaria
  imbricata_), laurel and calden (_Prosopis algarobilla_). The provinces
  of Santa Fé, Córdoba and Santiago del Estero are only partially
  wooded; large areas of plains are intermingled with scrubby forests of
  algarrobo (_Prosopis_), quebracho-blanco (_Aspido-sperma quebracho_),
  tala (_Celtis tola_, _Sellowiana_, _acuminata_), acacias and other
  genera. In Tucumán and eastern Salta the same division into forests
  and open plains exists, but the former are of denser growth and
  contain walnut, cedar, laurel, tipa (_Machaerium fertile_) and
  quebracho-colorado (_Loxopterygium Lorentzii_). The territories of the
  Gran Chaco, however, are covered with a characteristic tropical
  vegetation, in which the palm predominates, but intermingled south of
  the Bermejo with heavy growths of algarrobo, quebracho-colorado,
  urunday (_Astronium fraxinifolium_), lapacho (_Tecoma curialis_) and
  palosanto (_Cuayacum officinalis_), all esteemed for hardness and
  fineness of grain. Other palms abound, such as the pindo (_Cocos
  australis_), mbocaya (_Cocos sclerocarpa_) and the yatai (_Cocos
  yatai_), but the predominating species north of the Bermejo is the
  caranday or Brazilian wax-palm (_Copernicia cerifera_), which has
  varied uses. The forest habit in this region is close association of
  species, and there are "palmares," "algarrobales," "chañarales," &c,,
  and among these open pasture lands, giving to a distant landscape a
  park-like appearance. In the "mesopotamia" region the flora is similar
  to that of the southern Chaco, but in the Misiones it approximates
  more to that of the neighbouring Brazilian highlands. Among the
  marvellous changes wrought in Argentina by the advent of European
  civilization, is the creation of a new flora by the introduction of
  useful trees and plants from every part of the world. Indian corn,
  quinoa, mandioca, possibly the potato, cotton and various fruits,
  including the strawberry, were already known to the aborigines, but
  with the conqueror came wheat, barley, oats, flax, many kinds of
  vegetables, apples, peaches, apricots, pears, grapes, figs, oranges
  and lemons, together with alfalfa and new grasses for the plains. The
  Australian eucalyptus is now grown in many places, and there are
  groves of the paradise or paraiso tree (_Melia azedarach_) on the
  formerly treeless pampa. The cereals of Europe are a source of
  increasing wealth to the nation, and alfalfa promises new prosperity
  for pastoral industries.

  _Fauna._--The Argentine fauna, like its flora, has been greatly
  influenced by the character and position of the pampas. Whatever it
  may have been in remote geological periods, it is now extremely
  limited both in size and numbers. Of the indigenous fauna, the tapir
  of the north and the guanaco of the west and south are the largest of
  the animals. The pampas were almost destitute of animal life before
  the horses and cattle of the Spanish invaders were there turned out to
  graze, and the puma and jaguar never came there until the herds of
  European cattle attracted them. The timid viscacha (_Lagostomus
  trichodactylus_), living in colonies, often with the burrowing owl,
  and digging deep under ground like the American prairie dog, was
  almost the only quadruped to be seen upon these immense open plains.
  The fox, of which several species exist, probably never ventured far
  into the plain, for it afforded him no shelter. Immense flocks of
  gulls were probably attracted to it then as now by its insect life,
  and its lagoons and streams teemed with aquatic birds. The occupation
  of this region by Europeans, and the introduction of horses, asses,
  cattle, sheep, goats and swine, have completely changed its aspect and
  character. On the Patagonian steppes there are comparatively few
  species of animals. Among them are the puma (_Felis concolor_), a
  smaller variety of the jaguar (_Felis onça_), the wolf, the fox, the
  Patagonian hare (_Dolichotis patagonica_) and two species of wild cat.
  The huge glyptodon once inhabited this region, which now possesses the
  smallest armadillo known, the "quir-quincho" or _Dasypus minutus_. The
  guanaco (_Auchenia_), which ranges from Tierra del Fuego to the
  Bolivian highlands, finds comparative safety in these uninhabitable
  solitudes, and is still numerous. The "ñandú" or American ostrich
  (_Rhea americana_), inhabiting the pampas and open plains of the
  Chaco, has in Patagonia a smaller counterpart (_Rhea Darwinii_), which
  is never seen north of the Rio Negro. On the arid plateaus of the
  north-west, the guanaco and vicuña are still to be found, though less
  frequently, together with a smaller species of viscacha (_Lagidium
  cuvieri_). The greatest development of the Argentine fauna, however,
  is in the warm, wooded regions of the north and north-east, where many
  animals are of the same species as those in the neighbouring
  territories of Brazil. Several species of monkeys inhabit the forests
  from the Paraná to the Bolivian frontier. Pumas, jaguars and one or
  two species of wild cat are numerous, as also the Argentine wolf and
  two of three species of fox. The coatí, marten, skunk and otter
  (_Lutra paranensis_) are widely distributed. Three species of deer are
  common. In the Chaco the tapir or anta (_Tapir americanus_) still
  finds a safe retreat, and the peccary (_Dycotyles torquatus_) ranges
  from Córdoba north to the Bolivian frontier. The capybara
  (_Hydrochoerus capybara_) is also numerous in this region. Of birds
  the number of species greatly exceeds that of the mammals, including
  the rhea of the pampas and condor of the Andes, and the tiny,
  brilliant-hued humming-birds of the tropical North. Vultures and hawks
  are well represented, but perhaps the most numerous of all are the
  parrots, of which there are six or seven species. The reptilians are
  represented in the Paraná by the jacaré (_Alligator sclerpos_), and on
  land by the "iguana" (_Teius teguexim, Podinema teguixin_), and some
  species of lizard. Serpents are numerous, but only two are described
  as poisonous, the cascavel (rattlesnake) and the "vibora de la cruz"
  (_Trigonocephalus alternatus_).[2]

_Population._--In population Argentina ranks second among the republics
of South America, having outstripped, during the last quarter of the
19th century, the once more populous states of Colombia and Peru. During
the first half of the 19th century civil war and despotic government
seriously restricted the natural growth of the country, but since the
definite organization of the republic in 1860 and the settlement of
disturbing political controversies, the population had increased
rapidly. Climate and a fertile soil have been important elements in this
growth. According to the first national census of 1869 the population
was 1,830,214. The census of 1895 increased this total to 3,954,911,
exclusive of wild Indians and a percentage for omissions customarily
used in South American census returns. In 1904 official estimates, based
on immigration and emigration returns and upon registered births and
deaths, both of which are admittedly defective, showed a population
increased to 5,410,028, and a small diminution in the rate of annual
increase from 1895 to 1904 as compared with 1860-1895. The birth-rate is
exceptionally high, largely because of the immigrant population, the
greater part of which is concentrated in or near the large cities. In
the rural districts of the northern provinces, the increase in
population is much less than in the central provinces, the conditions of
life being less favourable. According to the official returns,[3] the
over-sea immigration for the forty-seven years 1857-1903 aggregated
2,872,588, while the departure of emigrants during the same period was
1,066,480, showing a net addition to the population of 1,806,108. A
considerable percentage of these arrivals and departures represents
seasonal labourers, who come out from Europe solely for the Argentine
wheat harvest and should not be classed as immigrants. Unfavourable
political and economic conditions of a temporary character influence the
emigration movement. During the years 1880-1889, when the country
enjoyed exceptional prosperity, the arrivals numbered 1,020,907 and the
departures only 175,038, but in 1890-1899, a period of financial
depression following the extravagant Celman administration, the arrivals
were 928,865 and the departures 532,175. Another disturbing influence
has been the high protective tariffs, adopted during the closing years
of the century, which increased the costs of living more rapidly than
the wages for labour, and compelled thousands of immigrants to seek
employment elsewhere. The influence of such legislation on unsettled
immigrant labourers may be seen in the number of Italians who
periodically migrate from Argentina to Brazil, and _vice versa_, seeking
to better their condition. Of the immigrant arrivals for the forty-seven
years given, 1,331,536 were Italians, 414,973 Spaniards, 170,293 French,
37,953 Austrians, 35,435 British, 30,699 Germans, 25,775 Swiss, 19,521
Belgians, and the others of diverse nationalities, so that Argentina is
in no danger of losing her Latin character through immigration. This
large influx of Europeans, however, is modifying the population by
reducing the Indian and _mestizo_ elements to a minority, although they
are still numerous in the mesopotamian, northern and north-western
provinces. The language is Spanish.

_Science and Literature._--Though the university of Córdoba is the
oldest but one in South America, it has made no conspicuous contribution
to Argentine literature beyond the historical works of its famous
rector, Gregorio Funes (1749-1830). This university was founded in 1621
and the university of Buenos Aires in 1821, but although Bonpland and
some other European scientists were members of the faculty of Buenos
Aires in its early years, neither there nor at Córdoba was any marked
attention given to the natural sciences until President Sarmiento
(official term, 1868-1874) initiated scientific instruction at the
university of Córdoba under the eminent German naturalist, Dr Hermann
Burmeister (1807-1892), and founded the National Observatory at Córdoba
and placed it under the direction of the noted American astronomer,
Benjamin Apthorp Gould (1824-1896). Both of these men made important
contributions to science, and rendered an inestimable service to the
country, not only through their publications but also through the
interest they aroused in scientific research. A bureau of meteorology
was afterwards created at Córdoba which has rendered valuable service.
Dr Burmeister was afterwards placed in charge of the provincial museum
of Buenos Aires, and devoted himself to the acquisition of a collection
of fossil remains, now in the La Plata museum, which ranks among the
best of the world. Not only has scientific study advanced at the
university of Buenos Aires, but scientific research is promoting the
development of the country; examples are the geographical explorations
of the Andean frontier, and especially of the Patagonian Andes, by
Francisco P. Moreno. In literature Argentina is still under the spell of
Bohemianism and dilettanteism. Exceptions are the admirable biographies
of Manuel Belgrano (d. 1820) and San Martin, important contributions to
the history of the country and of the war of independence, by
ex-President Bartolomé Mitre (1821-1906). Buenos Aires has some
excellent daily journals, but the tone of the press in general is
sensational. The number of newspapers published is large, especially in
Buenos Aires, where in 1902 the total, including sundry periodicals, was
183.

_Political Divisions and Towns._--The chief political divisions of the
republic consist of one federal district, 14 provinces and 10
territories, the last in great part dating from the settlement of the
territorial controversies with Chile. For purposes of local
administration the provinces are divided into departments. The names,
area and population of the provinces and territories are as follows:

  +---------------------------+----------+----------+----------+
  |                           |   Area   |    Pop.  | Pop. est.|
  | Administrative Divisions. |  sq. m.  |   1895.  | for 1904.|
  +---------------------------+----------+----------+----------+
  |   _Provinces_--           |          |          |          |
  | Federal Capital           |      72  |  663,854 |  979,235 |
  | Buenos Aires              | 117,778  |  921,168 |1,312,953 |
  | Santa Fé                  |  50,916  |  397,188 |  640,755 |
  | Entre Rios                |  28,784  |  292,019 |  367,006 |
  | Corrientes                |  32,580  |  239,618 |  299,479 |
  | Córdoba                   |  62,160  |  351,223 |  465,464 |
  | San Luis                  |  28,535  |   81,450 |   97,458 |
  | Santiago del Estero       |  39,764  |  161,502 |  186,206 |
  | Mendoza                   |  56,502  |  116,136 |  159,780 |
  | San Juan                  |  33,715  |   84,251 |   99,933 |
  | Rioja                     |  34,546  |   69,302 |   82,099 |
  | Catamarca                 |  47,531  |   90,161 |  103,082 |
  | Tucumán                   |   8,926  |  215,742 |  263,079 |
  | Salta                     |  62,184  |  118,015 |  136,059 |
  | Jujuy                     |  18,977  |   49,713 |   55,430 |
  |                           |          |          |          |
  |   _Territories_--         |          |          |          |
  | Misiones                  |   11,282 |   33,163 |   38,755 |
  | Formosa                   |   41,402 |    4,829 |    6,094 |
  | Chaco                     |   32,741 |   10,422 |   13,937 |
  | Pampa                     |   56,320 |   25,914 |   52,150 |
  | Neuquen                   |   42,345 |   14,517 |   18,022 |
  | Rio Negro                 |   75,924 |    9,241 |   18,648 |
  | Chobut                    |   93,427 |    3,748 |    9,000 |
  | Santa Cruz                |  109,142 |    1,058 |    1,793 |
  | Tierra del Fuego          |    8,299 |      477 |    1,411 |
  | Los Andes                 |   21,989 |    ..    |    2,095 |
  |                           +----------+----------+----------+
  |      Total                |1,135,840 |3,954,911 |5,410,028 |
  | Gotha computations of 1902|          |          |          |
  |   with corrections for    |          |          |          |
  |   boundary changes.       |1,083,596 |          |          |
  +---------------------------+----------+----------+----------+

The principal towns, with estimated population for 1905, are as follows:
Buenos Aires (1,025,653), Rosario (129,121), La Plata (85,000), Tucumán
(55,000), Córdoba (43.000), Sante Fé (33,200), Mendoza (32,000), Parana
(27,000), Salta (18,000), Corrientes (18,000), Chivilcoy (15,000),
Gualeguaychú (13,300), San Nicolás (13,000), Concordia (11,700), San
Juan (11,500), Río Cuarto (10,800), San Luis (10,500), Barracas al Sud
(10,200).

  _Communications._--The development of railways in Argentina, which
  dates from 1857 when the construction of the Buenos Aires Western was
  begun, was at first slow and hesitating, but after 1880 it went
  forward rapidly. Official corruption and speculation have led to some
  unsound ventures, but in the great majority of cases the lines
  constructed have been beneficial and productive. The principal centres
  of the system are Buenos Aires, Rosario and Bahia Blanca, with La
  Plata as a secondary centre to the former, and from these the lines
  radiate westward and northward. The creation of a commercial port at
  Bahia Blanca and the development of the territories of La Pampa, Rio
  Negro and Neuquen, have given an impetus to railway construction in
  that region, and new lines are being extended toward the promising
  districts among the Andean foothills. Beginning with 6 m. in 1857, the
  railway mileage of the republic increased to 1563 m. in 1880, 5865 m.
  in 1890, 7752 m. in 1891, 10,304 m. in 1901, and 12,274 m. in 1906,
  with 1794 m. under construction. The greater development of railway
  construction between 1885 and 1891 was due, principally, to the
  dubious concessions of interest guarantees by the Celman
  administration, and also to the fever of speculation. Some of these
  lines resulted disastrously. The Transandine line, designed to open
  railway communication between Buenos Aires and Valparaiso, was so far
  completed early in 1909 that on the Argentine side only the summit
  tunnel, 2 m. 127 yds. long, remained to be finished. The piercing was
  completed in Nov. 1909, but in the meantime passengers were conveyed
  by road over the pass. The gauge is broken at Mendoza, the Buenos
  Aires and Pacific having a gauge of 5 ft. 6 in. and the Transandine of
  one metre.

  Tramway lines, which date from 1870, are to be found in all important
  towns. Those of Buenos Aires, Rosario and La Plata are owned by public
  companies. According to the census returns of 1895, the total mileage
  was 496 m., representing a capital expenditure of $84,044,581 paper.
  Electric traction was first used in Buenos Aires in 1897, since when
  nearly all the lines of that city have been reconstructed to meet its
  requirements, and subways are contemplated to relieve the congested
  street traffic of the central districts; the companies contribute 6%
  of their gross receipts to the municipality, besides paying $50 per
  annum per square on each single track in paved streets, 5 per thousand
  on the value of their property, and 33% of the cost of street repaving
  and renewals.

  The telegraph lines of Argentina are subject to the national telegraph
  law of 1875, the international telegraph conventions, and special
  conventions with Brazil and Uruguay. In 1902 the total length of wires
  strung was 28,125 m.; in 1906 it had been increased to 34,080 m. The
  national lines extend from Buenos Aires north to La Quiaca on the
  Bolivian frontier (1180 m.), and south to Cape Virgenes (1926 m.), at
  the entrance to the Straits of Magellan. Telegraphic communication
  with Europe is effected by cables laid along the Uruguayan and
  Brazilian coasts, and by the Brazilian land lines to connect with
  transatlantic cables from Pernambuco. Communication with the United
  States is effected by land lines to Valparaiso, and thence by a cable
  along the west coast. The service is governed by the international
  telegraph regulations, but is subject to local inspection and
  interruption in times of political disorder.

  The postal and telegraph services are administered by the national
  government, and are under the immediate supervision of the minister of
  the interior. Argentina has been a member of the Postal Union since
  1878. Owing to the great distances which must be covered, and also to
  the defective means of communication in sparsely settled districts,
  the costs of the postal service in Argentina are unavoidably high in
  relation to the receipts.

  _Shipping._--Although Argentina has an extensive coast-line, and one
  of the great fluvial systems of the world, the tonnage of steamers and
  sailing vessels flying her flag is comparatively small. In 1898 the
  list comprised only 1416 sailing vessels of all classes, from 10 tons
  up, with a total tonnage of 118,894 tons, and 222 steamships, of
  36,323 tons. There has been but slight improvement since that date.
  There are excellent fishing grounds on the coast, but they have had no
  appreciable influence in developing a commerical marine. The
  steamships under the national flag are almost wholly engaged in the
  traffic between Buenos Aires and Montevideo, the river traffic, and
  port services.

    Live stock, &c.

  _Agriculture._--In 1878 the production of wheat was insufficient for
  home consumption, the amount of Indian corn grown barely covered local
  necessities, and the only market for live stock was in the
  slaughtering establishments, where the meat was cut into strips and
  cured, making the so-called "jerked beef" for the Brazilian and Cuban
  markets. But three years later a new economic development began. In
  1881 President Roca offered for public purchase by auction the lands
  in the south-west of the province of Buenos Aires, the Pampa Central,
  and the Neuquen district, these lands having been rendered habitable
  after the campaign of 1878 against the Indians. The upset (reserve)
  price was £80 sterling per square league of 6669 acres, and, as the
  lands were quickly sold, an expansion of the pastoral industry
  immediately ensued. The demand for animals for stock-breeding purposes
  sent up prices, and this acted as a stimulus to other branches of
  trade, so that, as peace under the Roca regime seemed assured, a
  steady flow of immigration from Italy set in. The development of the
  pastoral industry of Argentina from that time to the end of the
  century was remarkable. In 1878 the number of cattle was 12,000,000;
  of sheep, 65,000,000; and of horses, 4,000,000; in 1899 the numbers
  were--cattle, 25,000,000; sheep, 89,000,000; and horses, about
  4,500,000. Originally the cattle were nearly all of the long-horned
  Spanish breed and of little value for their meat, except to the
  saladero establishments. Gradually Durham, Shorthorn, Hereford and
  other stock were introduced to improve the native breeds, with results
  so satisfactory that now herds of three-quarters-bred cattle are to be
  found in all parts of the country. Holstein, Jersey and other
  well-known dairy breeds were imported for the new industries of
  butter- and cheese-making. Not only has the breed of cattle been
  improved, but the system of grazing has completely altered. Vast areas
  of land have been ploughed and sown with lucerne (alfalfa);
  magnificent permanent pasturage has been created where there were
  coarse and hard grasses in former days, and Argentina has been able to
  add baled hay to her list of exports. In 1889 the first shipment of
  Argentine cattle, consisting altogether of 1930 steers, was sent to
  England. The results of these first experiments were not encouraging,
  owing mainly to the poor class of animals, but the exporters
  persevered, and the business steadily grew in value and importance,
  until in 1898 the number of live cattle shipped was 359,296, which
  then decreased to 119,189 in 1901, because of the foot-and-mouth
  disease. In 1906 the export of live stock was prohibited for that
  reason. Large quantities of frozen and preserved meat are exported,
  profitable prices being realized. Dairy-farming is making rapid
  strides, and the development of sheep-farming has been remarkable. In
  1878, 65,000,000 sheep yielded 230,000,000 Ib weight of wool, or an
  average per sheep of, about 3½ lb. In the season of 1899-1900 the wool
  exports weighed 420,000,000 Ib, and averaged more than 5 lb. per
  sheep. The extra weight of fleece was owing to the large importation
  of better breeds. The export, moreover, of live sheep and of frozen
  mutton to Europe has become an important factor in the trade of
  Argentina. In 1892 the number of live sheep shipped for foreign ports
  was 40,000; in 1898 the export reached a total of 577,813, which in
  1901 fell off to 25,746. In 1892 the frozen mutton exported was 25,500
  tons, and this had increased in 1901 to 63,013 tons.

    Crops.

  The advance made in agricultural industry also is of very great
  importance. In 1872 the cultivated area was about 1,430,000 acres; in
  1895, 12,083,000 acres; in 1901, 17,465,973 acres. In 1899 the wheat
  exports exceeded 50,000,000 bushels, and the Indian corn 40,000,000
  bushels. The area under wheat in 1901 was 8,351,843 acres; Indian
  corn, 3,102,140 acres; linseed, 1,512,340 acres; alfalfa, 3,088,929
  acres. The farming industry is not, however, on a satisfactory basis.
  No national lands in accessible districts are available for the
  application of a homestead law, and the farmer too often has no
  interest in the land beyond the growing crops, a percentage of the
  harvest being the rent charged by the owner of the property. This
  system is mischievous, since, if a few, consecutive bad seasons occur,
  the farmer moves to some more favoured spot; while, on the other hand,
  a succession of good years tends to increase rents. The principal
  wheat and Indian corn producing districts lie in the provinces of
  Santa Fé, Buenos Aires, Córdoba and Entre Rios, and the average yield
  of wheat throughout the country is about 12 bushels to the acre.
  Little attention is paid to methods of cultivation, and the farmer has
  no resources to help him if the cereal crops fail. In the Andean
  provinces of Mendoza, San Juan, Catamarca and Rioja viticulture
  attracts much attention, and the area in vineyards in 1901 was 109,546
  acres, only 18% of which was outside the four provinces named. Wine is
  manufactured in large quantities, but the output is not sufficient to
  meet the home demand. In the provinces of Tucumán, Salta and Jujuy the
  main industry is sugar growing and manufacture. In 1901 the production
  of sugar was 151,639 tons, of which 58,000 tons were exported. The
  sugar manufacture, however, is a protected and bounty-fed industry,
  and the 51 sugar mills in operation in 1901 are a heavy tax upon
  consumers and taxpayers. Other products are tobacco, olives,
  castor-oil, peanuts, canary-seed, barley, rye, fruit and vegetables.

  The pastoral and agricultural industries have been hampered by
  fluctuations in the value of the currency, farm products being sold at
  a gold value for the equivalent in paper, while labourers are paid in
  currency. The existing system of taxation also presses heavily upon
  the provinces, as may be seen from the fact that the national,
  provincial and municipal exactions together amount to £7 per head of
  population, while the total value of the exports in 1898 was only £6
  in round numbers. The _guia_ tax on the transport of stock from one
  province to another, which has been declared unconstitutional in the
  courts, is still enforced, and is a vexatious tax upon the
  stock-raiser, while the consumption, or _octroi_, tax in Buenos Aires
  and other cities is a heavy burden upon small producers.

  _Manufactures._--Manufacturing enterprise in Argentina, favoured by
  the protection of a high tariff, made noticeable progress in the
  national capital during the closing years of the last century,
  especially in those small industries which commanded a secure market.
  The principal classes of products affected are foods, wearing apparel,
  building materials, furniture, &c., chemical products, printing and
  allied trades, and sundry others, such as cigars, matches, tanning,
  paints, &c. In some manufactures the raw material is imported partly
  manufactured, such as thread for weaving. The lack of coal in
  Argentina greatly increases the difficulty and cost of maintaining
  these industries, and high prices of the products result. Electric
  power generated by steam is now commonly used in Buenos Aires and
  other large cities for driving light machinery.

  _Commerce._--The rapid development of the foreign trade of the
  republic since 1881 is due to settled internal conditions and to the
  prime necessity to the commercial world of many Argentine products,
  such as beef, mutton, hides, wool, wheat and Indian corn. Efforts to
  hasten this development have created some serious financial and
  industrial crises, and have burdened the country with heavy debts and
  taxes. During the decade 1881-1890 great sums of European capital were
  invested in railways and other undertakings, encouraged by the grant
  of interest guarantees and by state mortgage bank loans in the form of
  _cedulas_, nominally secured on landed property. In 1890 the crisis
  came, the mortgage banks failed, credits were contracted, the value of
  property declined, defaults were common, imports decreased, and the
  losses to the country were enormous. The constant fluctuations in the
  value of the currency, then much depreciated, intensified the distress
  and complicated the situation. Recovery required years, although made
  easier by the sound and steady development of the pastoral and
  agricultural industries, which were slightly affected by the crisis;
  and the steadily increasing volume of exports, mainly foodstuffs and
  other staples, saved the situation. There have been some changes in
  commercial methods since 1890, the retailer, and sometimes the
  consumer, importing direct to save intermediate commission charges.
  Such transactions are made easy by the foreign banks established in
  all the large cities of the republic. The conversion law of 1899,
  which gave a fixed gold value to the currency (44 centavos gold for
  each 100 centavos paper), has had beneficial influence on commercial
  transactions, through the elimination of daily fluctuations in the
  value of the currency, and the commercial and financial situation has
  been steadily improved, notwithstanding heavy taxation and tariff
  restrictions. The import trade shows the largest totals in foodstuffs,
  wines and liquors, textiles and raw materials for their manufacture,
  wood and its manufactures, iron and its manufactures, paper and
  cardboard, glass and ceramic wares. The official valuation of imports,
  which is arbitrary and incorrect, was $164,569,884 gold in 1889, fell
  off to $67,207,780 in 1891, but gradually increased to $205,154,420 in
  1905. The exports, which are almost wholly of agricultural and
  pastoral products, increased from $103,219,000 in 1891 to $322,843,841
  in 1905.

_Government._--The present constitution of Argentina dates from the 25th
of September 1860. The legislative power is vested in a congress of two
chambers--the senate, composed of 30 members (two from each province and
two from the capital), elected by the provincial legislatures and by a
special body of electors in the capital for a term of nine years; and
the chamber of deputies, of 120 members (1906), elected for four years
by direct vote of the people, one deputy for every 33,000 inhabitants.
To the chamber of deputies exclusively belongs the initiation of all
laws relating to the raising of money and the conscription of troops. It
has also the exclusive right to impeach the president, vice-president,
cabinet ministers, and federal judges before the senate. The executive
power is exercised by the president, elected by presidential electors
from each province chosen by direct vote of the people. The president
and vice-president are voted for by separate tickets. The system closely
resembles that followed in the United States. The president must be a
native citizen of Argentina, a Roman Catholic, not under thirty years of
age, and must have an annual income of at least $2000. His term of
office is six years, and neither he nor the vice-president is eligible
for the next presidential term. All laws are sanctioned and promulgated
by the president, who is invested with the veto power, which can be
overruled only by a two-thirds vote. The president, with the advice and
consent of the senate, appoints judges, diplomatic agents, governors of
territories, and officers of the army and navy above the rank of
colonel. All other officers and officials he appoints and promotes
without the consent of the senate. The cabinet is composed of eight
ministers--the heads of the government departments of the interior,
foreign affairs, finance, war, marine, justice, agriculture, and public
works. They are appointed by and may be removed by the president.

Justice is administered by a supreme federal court of five judges and an
attorney-general, which is also a court of appeal, four courts of
appeal, with three judges each, located in Buenos Aires, La Plata,
Paraná and Córdoba, and by a number of inferior and local courts. Each
province has also its own judicial system. Trial by jury is established
by the constitution, but never practised. Civil and criminal courts are
both corrupt and dilatory. In May 1899 the minister of justice stated in
the chamber of deputies that the machinery of the courts in the country
was antiquated, unwieldy and incapable of performing its duties; that
50,000 cases were then waiting decision in the minor courts, and 10,000
in the federal division; and that a reconstruction of the judiciary and
the judicial system had become necessary. In June 1899 he sent his
project for the reorganization of the legal procedure to congress, but
no action was then taken beyond referring the bill to a committee for
examination and report. The proceedings are, with but few exceptions,
written, and the procedure is a survival of the antiquated Spanish
system.

Under the constitution, the provinces retain all the powers not
delegated to the federal government. Each province has its own
constitution, which must be republican in form and in harmony with that
of the nation. Each elects its governor, legislators and provincial
functionaries of all classes, without the intervention of the federal
government. Each has its own judicial system, and enacts laws relating
to the administration of justice, the distribution and imposition of
taxes, and all matters affecting the province. All the public acts and
judicial decisions of one province have full legal effect and authority
in all the others. In cases of armed resistance to a provincial
government, the national government exercises the right to intervene by
the appointment of an interventor, who becomes the executive head of the
province until order is restored. The territories are under the direct
control of the national government.

_Army._--The military service of the republic was reorganized in 1901,
and is compulsory for all citizens between the ages of 20 and 45. The
army consists of: (1) The Line, comprising the Active and Reserve, in
which all citizens 20 to 28 years of age are obliged to serve; (2) the
National Guard, comprising citizens of 28 to 40 years; (3) the
Territorial Guard, comprising those 40 to 45 years. Conscripts of 20
years of age have to serve two years, three months each year. The active
or standing army comprises 18 battalions of infantry, 12 regiments of
cavalry, 8 regiments of artillery, and 4 battalions of engineers. A
military school, with 125 cadets, is maintained at San Martin, near the
national capital, and a training school for non-commissioned officers in
the capital itself. Compulsory attendance of young men at national guard
drills is enforced for at least two months of the year, under penalty of
enforced service in the Line. In 1906 the president announced that
permission had been given by the German emperor for 30 Argentine
officers to enter the German army each year and to serve eighteen
months, and also for five officers to attend the Berlin Military
Academy. The equipment of the standing army is thoroughly modern, the
infantry being provided with Mauser rifles and the artillery with Krupp
batteries.

_Navy._--The disputes with Chile during the closing years of the 19th
century led to a large increase in the navy, but in 1902 a treaty
between the two countries provided for the restriction of further
armaments for the next four years. The naval vessels then under
construction were accordingly sold, but in 1906 both countries,
influenced apparently by the action of Brazil, gave large orders in
Europe for new vessels. At the time when further armaments were
suspended, the effective strength of the Argentine navy consisted of 3
ironclads, 6 first-class armoured cruisers, 2 monitors (old), 4
second-class cruisers, 2 torpedo cruisers, 3 destroyers, 3 high-sea
torpedo boats, 14 river torpedo boats, 1 training ship, 5 transports,
and various auxiliary vessels. Two of these first-class cruisers were
sold to Japan. The armament included 394 guns of all calibres, 6 of
which were of 250 millimetres, 4 of 240, and 12 of 200. There are about
320 officers in active service, and the total personnel ranges from 5000
to 6000 men. The service is not popular, and it is recruited by means of
conscription from the national guard, the term of service being two
years. These conscripts number about 2000 a year. In addition, there is
a corps of coast artillery numbering 450 men, from which garrisons are
drawn for the military port, Zárate arsenal and naval prison. The
government maintains a naval school at Flores, a school of mechanics in
Buenos Aires, an artillery school on the cruiser "Patagonia," and a
school for torpedo practice at La Plata. The naval arsenal is situated
on the "north basin" of the Buenos Aires port, and the military port at
Bahia Blanca is provided with a dry dock of the largest size, and
extensive repair shops. There is also a dockyard and torpedo arsenal at
La Plata, an artillery depot at Zárate, above Buenos Aires, and naval
depots on the island of Martin Garcia and at Tigre, on the Luján river.

_Education._--Primary education is free and secular, and is compulsory
for children of 6 to 14 years. In the national capital and territories
it is supervised by a national council of education with the assistance
of local school boards; in the 14 provinces it is under provincial
control. Secondary instruction is also free, but is not compulsory. It
is under the control of the national government, which in 1902
maintained 10 colleges. Of these colleges four are in Buenos Aires, one
in each province, and one in Conceptión del Uruguay. For the instruction
of teachers the republic has 28 normal schools, as follows: three in the
national capital; one in Paraná, three (regional) in Corrientes, San
Luis and Catamarca; 14 for female teachers in the provincial capitals;
and seven for either sex in the larger towns of the provinces of Buenos
Aires, Santa Fé, Córdoba and San Luis. The normal schools, maintained by
the state on a secular basis, were founded by President Sarmiento, who
engaged experienced teachers in the United States to direct them; their
work is excellent; notably, their model primary schools. For higher and
professional education there are two national universities at Buenos
Aires and Córdoba, and three provincial universities, at La Plata, Santa
Fé and Paraná, which comprise faculties of law, medicine and
engineering, in addition to the usual courses in arts and science. To
meet the needs of technical and industrial education there are a school
of mines at San Juan, a school of viticulture at Mendoza, an agronomic
and veterinary school at La Plata, several agricultural and pastoral
schools, and commercial schools in Buenos Aires, Rosario, Bahia Blanca
and Concordia. Schools of art and conservatories of music are also
maintained in the large cities, where there are, besides, many private
schools. Secular education has been vigorously opposed by strict
churchmen, and efforts have been made to maintain separate schools under
church control. The national government has founded several scholarships
(some in art) for study abroad. The total school population of Argentina
in 1900 (6 to 14 years) was 994,089, of which 45% attended school, and
13% of those not attending were able to read and write. The illiterate
school population was about 41%, and of those of 15 years and over 54%
were illiterate. Of the whole population over 6 years, 50.5% were
illiterate.

_Religion._--The Argentine constitution recognizes the Roman Catholic
religion as that of the state, but tolerates all others. The state
controls all ecclesiastical appointments, decides on the passing or
rejection of all decrees of the Holy See, and provides an annual subsidy
for maintenance of the churches and clergy. Churches and chapels are
founded and maintained by religious orders and private gift as well. At
the head of the Argentine hierarchy are one archbishop and five
suffragan bishops, who have five seminaries for the education of the
priesthood. From statistics of 1895 it appears that in each 1000 of
population 991 are Roman Catholics, 7 Protestants, and 2 Jews, the Jews
being entirely of Russian origin, sent into the republic since 1891 by
the Jewish Colonization Association under the provisions of the Hirsch
legacy; from 1895 to 1908 the number of Jews in Argentina increased from
6085 to about 30,000.

  _Finance._--The revenue of the republic is derived mainly from customs
  and excise, and the largest item of expenditure is the service of the
  public debt. Since 1891 the national budgets have been calculated in
  both gold and currency, and both receipts and expenditures have been
  carried out in this dual system. The collection of a part of the
  import duties in gold has served to give the government the gold it
  requires for certain expenditures, but it has complicated returns and
  accounts and increased the burden of taxation. According to a
  compilation of statistical returns published by Dr. Francisco Latzina
  in 1901, the national revenues and expenditures for the 37 years from
  1864 to 1900, inclusive, reduced to a common standard, show a total
  deficit for that period of $408,260,795 gold, which has been met by
  external and internal loans, and by a continued increase in the scope
  and rate of taxation. The growth of the annual budget is shown by a
  comparison of the following years:--

              Total Revenue.        Total Expenditure.

    1864    $7,005,328 gold.        $7,119,931 gold.
    1880    19,594,306  "           26,919,295  "
    1890    73,150,856  "           95,363,854  "
    1900  / 62,045,458 paper.    / 104,501,614 paper.
          \ 37,998,704 gold.     \  23,644,543 gold.
    1905  / 63,439,000 paper.    / 105,581,680 paper.
          \ 43,461,324 gold.     \  24,865,016 gold.

  The bane of Argentine finance has been the extravagant and
  unscrupulous use of national credit for the promotion of schemes
  calculated to benefit individuals rather than the public. The large
  increase in military expenditures during the disputes with Chile also
  proved a heavy burden, and in the continued strife with Brazil for
  naval superiority this burden could not fail to be increased greatly.
  A very considerable percentage of Argentina's population of five to
  six millions is hopelessly poor and unprogressive, and cannot be
  expected to bear its share of the burden. To meet these expenditures
  there are a high tariff on imported merchandise, and excise and stamp
  taxes of a far-reaching and often vexatious character. Nothing is
  permitted to escape taxation, and duplicated taxes on the same thing
  are frequent. In Argentina these burdens bear heavily upon the
  labouring classes, and in years of depression they send away by
  thousands immigrants unable to meet the high costs of living. For the
  year 1900 the total expenditures of the national government, 14
  provincial governments, and 16 principal cities, were estimated to
  have been $208,811,925 paper, which is equivalent to $91,877,247 gold,
  or (at $5.04 per pound stg.) to £18,229,612, 10s. The population that
  year was estimated to be 4,794,149, from which it is seen that the
  annual costs of government were no less than £3, 16s. for each man,
  woman, and child in the republic. About 71% of this charge was on
  account of national expenditures, and 29% provincial and municipal
  expenditures. Had the expenses of all the small towns and rural
  communities been included, the total would be in excess of $20 gold,
  or £4, _per capita_.

  In 1889 the public debt of the republic amounted to about £24,000,000,
  but the financial difficulties which immediately followed that year,
  and the continuance of excessive expenditures, forced the debt up to
  approximately £128,000,000 during the next ten years. In the year 1905
  the outstanding and authorized debt of the republic was as follows:--

    External debt (July 31, 1905):

      National loans                              £42,297,050
      Provincial loans and others, assumed         30,395,916
      National cedulas                             11,763,923
                                                   ----------
                  Total                           £84,456,889

    Consolidated Internal debt (Dec. 31, 1904):

      Gold                          $16,544,000
      Paper                          79,174,400
                                     ----------   £10,178,718

      Total service on funded debt, 1905,
        $24,375,067 gold, and $15,914,335 paper    £6,225,669

      Floating debt                    £259,170
      Treasury bills (Apr. 30, 1905)    275,220
      Unpaid bills, $3,332,594, paper   288,560
                                      ---------      £822,950

  The paper currency forms an important part of the internal debt, and
  has been a fruitful source of trouble to the country. Few countries
  have suffered more from a depreciated currency than Argentina. During
  the era of so-called "prosperity" between 1881 and 1890 an enormous
  amount of bank notes were issued under various authorizations,
  especially that of the "free banking law" of 1887. During this period
  the bank-note circulation was increased to $161,700,000, and two
  mortgage banks--the National Hypothecary Bank and the Provincial
  Mortgage Bank (of Buenos Aires)--flooded the country with $509,000,000
  of _cedulas_ (hypothecary bonds). When the crash came and the national
  treasury was found to be without resources to meet current expenses,
  further issues of $110,000,000 in currency were made. The free-banking
  law which permitted the issue of notes by provincial banks was
  primarily responsible for this situation. Under the provisions of this
  law the provinces were authorized to borrow specie abroad and deposit
  the same with the national government as security for their issues.
  These loans aggregated £27,000,000. The Celman administration, in
  violation of the trust, then sold the specie and squandered the
  proceeds, leaving the provincial bank notes without guarantee and
  value. The national government has since assumed responsibility for
  all these provincial loans abroad. As on previous occasions, the great
  depreciation in the value of the currency has led to a repudiation of
  part of its nominal value. This depreciation reached its maximum in
  October 1891 ($460.82 paper for $100 gold), and remained between that
  figure and $264 during the next six years. To check these prejudicial
  fluctuations and to prevent too great a fall in the price of gold (to
  repeat a popular misconception), a conversion law was adopted on the
  31st of October 1899, which provided that the outstanding circulation
  should be redeemed at the rate of 44 centavos gold for each 100
  centavos paper, the official rate for gold being 227.27. Provisions
  were also made for the creation of a special conversion fund in specie
  to guarantee the circulation, which fund reached a total of
  $100,000,000 in March 1906. These measures have served to give greater
  stability to the value of the circulating medium, and to prevent the
  ruinous losses caused by a constant fluctuation in value, but the rate
  established prevents the further appreciation of the currency. On the
  18th of January 1906 the currency in circulation amounted to
  $502,420,485, which is more than $95 _per capita_.     (A. J. L.)

HISTORY

The first Europeans who visited the river Plate were a party of Spanish
explorers in search of a south-west passage to the East Indies. Their
leader, Juan Diaz de Solis, landing incautiously in 1516 on the north
coast with a few attendants to parley with a body of Charrua Indians,
was suddenly attacked by them and was killed, together with a number of
his followers. This untoward disaster led to the abandonment of the
expedition, which forthwith returned to Spain, bringing with them the
news of the discovery of a fresh-water sea. Four years later (1520) the
Portuguese seaman, Ferdinand Magellan, entered the estuary in his
celebrated voyage round the world, undertaken in the service of the king
of Spain (Charles I., better known as the emperor Charles V.). Magellan,
as soon as he had satisfied himself that there was no passage to the
west, left the river without landing.

  Cabot.

The first attempt to penetrate by way of the river Plate and its
affluents inland, with a view to effecting settlements in the interior,
was made in 1526 by Sebastian Cabot. This great navigator had already
won renown in the service of Henry VII. of England by his voyage to the
coast of North America in company with his father, Giovanni Caboto or
Cabot (see CABOT, JOHN). Sebastian Cabot had in 1519 deserted England
for Spain, and had received from King Charles the post of pilot-major
formerly held by Juan de Solis. In 1526 he was sent out in command of an
expedition fitted out for the purpose of determining by astronomical
observations the exact line of demarcation, under the treaty of
Tordesillas, between, the colonizing spheres of Spain and Portugal, and
of conveying settlers to the Moluccas. Arrived in the river Plate in
1527, rumours reached Cabot of mineral wealth and a rich and civilized
empire in the far interior, and he resolved to abandon surveying for
exploration. He built a fort a short distance up the river Uruguay, and
despatched one of his lieutenants, Juan Alvarez Ramon, with a separate
party upon an expedition up stream. This expedition was assailed by the
Charruas and forced to return on foot, their leader himself being
killed. Cabot, with a large following, entered the Paraná and
established a settlement just above the mouth of the river Carcarañal,
to which he gave the name of San Espiritù, among the Timbú Indians, with
whom he formed friendly relations. He continued the ascent of the Paraná
as far as the rapids of Apipé, and finding his course barred in this
direction, he afterwards explored the river Paraguay, which he mounted
as far as the mouth of the affluent called by the Indians Lepeti, now
the river Bermejo. His party was here fiercely attacked by the Agaces or
Payaguá Indians, and suffered severely. Cabot in his voyage had seen
many silver ornaments in the possession of the Timbú and Guarani
Indians. Some specimens of these trinkets he sent back to Spain with a
report of his discoveries. The arrival of these first-fruits of the
mineral wealth of the southern continent gained for the estuary of the
Paraná the name which it has since borne, that of Rio de la Plata, the
silver river. As Cabot was descending the stream to his settlement of
San Espiritù, he encountered an expedition which had been despatched
from Spain for the express purpose of exploring the river discovered by
Solis, under the command of Diego Garcia. Finding that he had been
forestalled, Garcia resolved to return home. Cabot himself, after an
absence of more than three years, came back in 1530, and applied to
Charles V. for means to open up communications with Peru by way of the
river Bermejo. The emperor's resources were, however, absorbed by his
struggle for European supremacy with Francis I. of France, and he was
obliged to leave the enterprise of South American discoveries to his
wealthy nobles. Cabot's colony at San Espiritù did not long survive his
departure; an attempt of the chief of the Timbús to gain possession of
one of the Spanish ladies of the settlement led to a treacherous
massacre of the garrison.

  Mendoza.

  Buenos Aires.

Two years after the return of Cabot, the news of Francisco Pizarro's
marvellous conquest of Peru reached Europe (1532), and stirred many an
adventurous spirit to strive to emulate his good fortune. Among these
was Pedro de Mendoza, a Basque nobleman. He obtained from Charles V. a
grant (_asiento_) of two hundred leagues of the coast from the boundary
of the Portuguese possessions southward towards the Straits of Magellan,
and the inland country which lay behind it. Mendoza undertook to conquer
and settle the territory at his own charges, certain profits being
reserved to the crown. In August 1534 the _adelantado_, or governor,
sailed from San Lucar, at the head of the largest and wealthiest
expedition that had ever left Europe for the New World. In January 1535
he entered the river Plate, where he followed the northern shore to the
island of San Gabriel, and then crossing over he landed by a little
stream, still called Riachuelo. The name of Buenos Aires was given to
the country by Sancho del Campo, brother-in-law of the _adelantado_, who
first stepped ashore. Here, on the 2nd of February, Mendoza laid the
foundations of a settlement which in honour of the day he named Santa
Maria de Buenos Aires. Mendoza, after some fierce encounters with the
Indians, now proceeded up the Paraná, and built a fort, which he called
Corpus Christi, near the site of Cabot's former settlement of San
Espiritù. The expedition, which originally numbered 2500 men, was
reduced by deaths at the hands of the Indians, by disease and privation,
within a year to less than 500 men. From Corpus Christi, Mendoza sent
out various bodies to explore the interior in the direction of Peru, but
without much success, and at length, thoroughly discouraged and broken
in health, he abandoned his enterprise, and returned to Spain in 1537.

  Asunción

A portion of one of the expeditions he despatched, under Juan de Ayolas,
pushing up the Paraguay, is said to have reached the south-east
districts of Peru, but while returning laden with booty, was attacked by
the Payaguá Indians, and every man perished. The other portion, which
had stayed behind as a reserve under Domingos Iralá, had better
fortunes. Finding their comrades did not return, Iralá and his
companions determined to descend the river, and on their downward
journey opposite the mouth of the river Pilcomayo, finding a suitable
site for colonizing, they founded (1536) what proved to be the first
permanent Spanish settlement in the interior of South America, the
future city of Asunción (15th August 1536).

  Iralá

In the meantime the colony at Buenos Aires had been dragging on a
miserable existence, and after terrible sufferings from famine and from
the ceaseless attacks of the Indians, the remaining settlers abandoned
the place and made their way up the river first to Corpus Christi, then
to Asunción. Here, by the emperor's orders, the assembled Spaniards
proceeded to the election of a captain-general, and their choice fell
almost unanimously on Domingos Martinez de Iralá, who was proclaimed
captain-general of the Rio de la Plata (August 1538). In 1542 the
settlement of Buenos Aires was re-established by an expedition sent for
the purpose from Spain, under a tried _adelantado_, Cabeza de Vaca. This
able leader, eager to reach Asunción as quickly as possible, sent on his
ships to the river Plate, but himself with a small following marched
overland from Santa Catherina on the coast of Brazil to join Iralá. His
doings at Asunción belong, however, not to the history of Argentina, but
of Paraguay. Suffice it to say that differences with Iralá eventually
led to his arrest, and to his being sent back to Spain to answer to the
charges brought against him for maladministration. The second settlement
made by his expedition at Buenos Aires was even less successful and
long-lived than the first. Exposed to the incessant attacks of the
savages, the piace was a second time abandoned, February 1543.

  Juan de Garay.

Forty years were now to elapse before any further efforts were made by
the Spaniards to colonize any part of the territory of the river Plate
and lower Paraná. In 1573 Juan de Garay, at the head of an expedition
despatched from Asunción, founded the city of Santa Fé near the
abandoned settlements of San Espiritù and Corpus Christi. Seven years
later (1580), when the new colony had been firmly established, Juan de
Garay proceeded southwards, and made the third attempt to build a city
on the site of Buenos Aires; and despite the determined hostility of the
Querendi Indians he succeeded in finally gaining a complete mastery over
them. In a desperate battle, the natives were defeated with great
slaughter, and the territory surrounding the town was divided into
ranches, in which the conquered natives had to labour. The new town
received from Garay the name of _Ciudad de la Santissima Trinidad_,
while its port retained the old appellation of Santa Maria de Buenos
Aires. It was endowed by its founder with a _cabildo_ (corporation) and
full Spanish municipal privileges. Garay, when on his way to Santa Fé,
was unfortunately murdered by a party of Indians, Minuas (Mimas), three
years later, while incautiously sleeping on the river bank near the
ruins of San Espiritù. The new settlement, however, continued to
prosper, and the cattle and horses brought from Europe multiplied and
spread over the plains of the Pampas.

In the meantime the Spaniards had penetrated into the interior of what
is now the Argentine Republic, and established themselves on the eastern
slopes of the Andes. In 1553 an expedition from Peru made their way
through the mountain region and founded the city of Santiago del Estero,
that of Tucumán in 1565, and that of Córdoba in 1573. Another expedition
from Chile, under Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza, crossed the Cordillera in
1559, and having defeated the Araucanian Indians, made a settlement
which from the name of the leader was called Mendoza. In 1620 Buenos
Aires was separated from the authority of the government established at
Asunción, and was made the seat of a government extending over Mendoza,
Santa Fé, Entre Rios and Corrientes, but at the same time remained like
the government of Paraguay at Asunción, and that of the province of
Tucumán, which had Córdoba as its capital, subject to the authority of
the viceroyalty of Peru.

  Evils of Spanish colonial system.

  Asiento question.

Thus at the opening of the 17th century, after many adventurous efforts,
and the expenditure of many lives and much treasure, the Spaniards found
themselves securely established on the river Plate, and had planted a
number of centres of trade and colonization in the interior.
Unfortunately, in no part of the Spanish oversea possessions did the
restrictive legislation of the home government operate more harshly or
disadvantageously to the interests of the colony; it was a more
effective hindrance to the development of its resources and the spread
of civilization over the country, than the hostility of the Indians.
Cabot had urged the feasibility of opening an easier channel for trade
with the interior of Peru through the river Plate and its tributaries,
than that by way of the West Indies and Panama; and now that his views
were able to be realized, the interests of the merchants of Seville and
of Lima, who had secured a monopoly of the trade by the route of the
isthmus, were allowed to destroy the threatened rivalry of that by the
river Plate. Never in the history of colonization has a mother country
pursued so relentlessly a policy more selfish and short-sighted. Spanish
legislation was not satisfied with endeavouring to exclude all European
nations except Spain from trading with the West Indies, but it sought to
limit all commerce to one particular route, and it forbade any trade
being transacted by way of the river Plate, thus enacting the most
flagrant injustice towards the people it had encouraged to settle in the
latter country. The strongest protests were raised, but the utmost they
could effect was that, in 1618, permission was granted to export from
Buenos Aires two shiploads of produce a year. But the Spanish government
was not content with the prohibition of sea-borne commerce. To prevent
internal trade with Peru a custom-house was set up at Córdoba to levy a
duty of 50% on everything in transit to and from the river Plate. In
1665 the relaxation of this system was brought about by the continual
remonstrances of the people, but for more than a century afterwards
(until 1776) the policy of exclusion was enforced. This naturally led to
a contraband trade of considerable dimensions. The English, after the
treaty of Utrecht (1715) held the contract (_asiento_) for supplying the
Spanish-American colonies with negro slaves. Among other places the
slave ships regularly visited Buenos Aires, and despite the efforts of
the Spanish authorities, contrived both to smuggle in and carry away a
quantity of goods. This illicit commerce went on steadily till 1739,
when it led to an outbreak of war between England and Spain, which put
an end to the _asiento_. The Portuguese were even worse offenders, for
in 1680 they made a settlement on the north of the river Plate, right
opposite to Buenos Aires, named Colonia, which with one or two short
intervals, remained in their hands till 1777. From this port foreign
merchandise found its way duty free into the Spanish provinces of Buenos
Aires, Tucumán and Paraguay, and even into the interior of Peru. The
continual encroachments of the Portuguese at length led the Spanish
government to take the important step of making Buenos Aires the seat of
a viceroyalty with jurisdiction over the territories of the present
republics of Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay and the Argentine Confederation
(1776). At the same time all this country was opened to Spanish trade
even with Peru, and the development of its resources, so long thwarted,
was allowed comparatively free play. Pedro de Zeballos, the first
viceroy, took with him from Spain a large military force with which he
finally expelled the Portuguese from the banks of the river Plate.

  Effects of French war.

The wars of the French Revolution, in which Spain was allied with France
against Great Britain, interrupted the growing prosperity of Buenos
Aires. On the 17th of June 1806 General William Beresford landed with a
body of troops from a British fleet under the command of Sir Home
Popham, and obtained possession of Buenos Aires. But a French officer,
Jacques de Liniers, gathered together a large force with which he
enclosed the British within the walls, and finally, on the 12th of
August, by a successful assault, forced Beresford and his troops to
surrender. In July 1807 another British force of eight thousand men
under General Whitelock endeavoured to regain possession of Buenos
Aires, but strenuous preparations had been made for resistance, and
after fierce street fighting the invading army, after suffering severe
losses, was compelled to capitulate. The colonists, who had achieved
their two great successes without any aid from the home government, were
naturally elated, and began to feel a new sense of self-reliance and
confidence in their own resources. The successful defence of Buenos
Aires accentuated the growing feeling of dissatisfaction with the
Spanish connexion, which was soon to lead to open insurrection. The
establishment of the Napoleonic dynasty at Madrid was the actual cause
which brought about the disturbances which were to end in separation.
Liniers was viceroy on the arrival of the news of the crowning of Joseph
Bonaparte as king of Spain, but as a Frenchman he was distrusted and was
deposed by the adherents of Ferdinand VII. The central junta at Seville,
acting in the name of Ferdinand, appointed Balthasar de Cisneros to be
viceroy in his place. He entered upon the duties of his office on the
19th of July 1809, and at first he gained popularity by acceding to the
urgent appeals of the people and throwing open the trade of the country
to all nations. But his measures speedily gave dissatisfaction to the
Argentine or Creole party, who had long chafed under the disabilities of
Spanish rule, and who now felt themselves no longer bound by ties of
loyalty to a country which was in the possession of the French armies.

  Struggle for independence.

On the 25th of May 1810 a great armed assembly met at Buenos Aires and a
provisional junta was formed to supersede the authority of the viceroy
and carry on the government. The acts of the new government ran in the
name of Ferdinand VII., but the step taken was a revolutionary one, and
the 25th of May has ever since been regarded as the birthday of
Argentine independence. The most prominent leader of the junta was its
secretary Mariano Moreno (1778-1811), who with a number of other active
supporters of the patriot cause succeeded in raising a considerable
force of Buenos Aireans to maintain, arms in hand, their nationalist and
anti-Spanish doctrines. An attempt of the Spanish party to make
Balthasar de Cisneros president of the junta failed, and the ex-viceroy
retired to Montevideo. A sanguinary struggle between the party of
independence and the adherents of Spain spread over the whole country,
and was carried on with varying fortune. Foremost among the leaders of
the revolutionary armies were Manuel Belgrano, and after March 1812
General José de San Martin, an officer who had gained experience against
the French in the Peninsular War. A state of disorder, almost of
anarchy, reigned in the provinces, but on the 25th of March 1816 a
congress of deputies was assembled at Tucumán, who named Don Martin
Pueyrredón supreme director, and on the 9th of July the separation of
the united provinces of the Rio de la Plata was formally proclaimed, and
comparative order was re-established in the country; Buenos Aires was
declared the seat of the government. The jealousy of the provinces,
however, against the capital led to a series of disturbances, and for
many years continual civil war devastated every part of the country.
Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay rose in armed revolt, and finally
established themselves as separate republics, whilst the city of Buenos
Aires itself was torn with faction and the scene of many a sanguinary
fight.

  Republic established.

From 1816, however, the independence of the Argentine Republic was
assured, and success attended the South Americans in their contest with
the royal armies. The combined forces of Buenos Aires and Chile defeated
the Spaniards at Chacabuco in 1817, and at Maipú in 1818; and from Chile
the victorious general José de San Martin led his troops into Peru,
where on the 9th of July 1821, he made a triumphal entry into Lima,
which had been the chief stronghold of the Spanish power, having from
the time of its foundation by Pizarro been the seat of government of a
viceroyalty which at one time extended to the river Plate. A general
congress was assembled at Buenos Aires on the 1st of March 1822, of
representatives from all the liberated provinces, and a general amnesty
was decreed, though the war was not over until the 9th of December 1824,
when the republican forces gained the final, victory of Ayacucho, in the
Peruvian border-land. The Spanish government did not, however, formally
acknowledge the independence of the country until the year 1842. On the
23rd of January 1825, a national constitution for the federal states,
which formed the Argentine Republic, was decreed; and on the 2nd of
February of the same year Sir Woodbine Parish, acting under the
instructions of George Canning, signed a commercial treaty in Buenos
Aires, by which the British government acknowledged the independence of
the country. It had already been recognized by the United States of
America two years previously.

  Unitarians and Federalists.

In 1826 Bernardo Rivadavia was elected president of the confederation.
His policy was to establish a strong central government, and he became
the head of a party known as Unitarians in contradistinction to their
opponents, who were styled Federalists, their aim being to maintain to
the utmost the local autonomy of the various provinces. Under the
government of Rivadavia the people of Buenos Aires became involved,
practically single-handed, in a war with Brazil in defence of the Banda
Oriental, which had been seized by the imperial forces (see URUGUAY).
The Brazilians were defeated, notably at Ituzaingo, and in 1827 the war
issued in the independence of Uruguay. Rivadavia's term of office was
likewise memorable for the constitution of the 24th of December 1826,
passed by the constituent congress of all the provinces, by which the
bonds which united the confederated states of the Argentine Republic
were strengthened. This project of closer union met, however, with much
opposition both at Buenos Aires and the provinces. Rivadavia resigned,
and Vicente Lopez, a Federalist, was elected to succeed him, but was
speedily displaced by Manuel Dorrego (1827), another representative of
the same party. The carrying out of Federalist principles led, however,
to the formation in the republic of a number of quasi-independent
military states, and Dorrego only ruled in Buenos Aires. After the
conclusion of the peace with Brazil, the Unitarians placed themselves
under the leadership of General Juan de Lavalle, the victor of
Ituzaingo. Lavalle, at the head of a division of troops, drove Dorrego
from Buenos Aires, pursued him into the interior, and captured him. He
was shot (December 9, 1828), by the order of Lavalle, and during the
year 1828 the country was given up to the horrors of civil war.

  Rosas dictator.

On the death of Dorrego, a remarkable man, Juan Manuel de Rosas, became
the Federalist chief. In 1829 he defeated Lavalle, made himself master
of Buenos Aires, and in the course of the next three years made his
authority recognized after much fighting throughout the provinces. The
Unitarians were relentlessly hunted down and a veritable reign of terror
ensued. Rosas gradually concentrated all power in his own hands, and was
hailed by the populace as a saviour of the state. In 1835, with the
title of governor and captain-general, he acquired dictatorial powers,
and all public authority passed into his hands. This dictatorship of
Rosas continued until 1852. In every department of administration and of
government he was supreme. He was exceedingly jealous of foreign
interference, and quarrelled with France on questions connected with the
rights of foreign residents. Buenos Aires was in 1838 blockaded by a
French fleet; but Rosas stood firm. A formidable revolt took place in
1839 under General Lavalle, who had returned to the country accompanied
by a number of banished Unitarians. In 1840 he invaded Buenos Aires at
the head of troops raised chiefly in the province of Entre Rios; but he
was defeated at Santa Fé, then at Luján, and finally was captured in
Jujuy and shot, 1841. The rule of Rosas was now one of tyranny and
almost incessant bloodshed in Buenos Aires, while his partisans,
foremost amongst whom was General Ignacio Oribe, endeavoured to
exterminate the Unitarians throughout the provinces. The scene of
slaughter was extended to the Banda Oriental by the attempt of Oribe,
with the support of Rosas, and of Justo José de Urquiza, governor of
Entre Rios, to establish himself as president of that republic (see
URUGUAY), where the existing government was hostile to Rosas and
sheltered all political refugees from the country under his despotic
rule. The siege of Montevideo led to a joint intervention of England and
France. Buenos Aires was blockaded by the combined English and French
fleets, September 1845, which landed a force to open the passage up the
Paraná to Paraguay, which had been declared closed to foreigners by
Rosas. A convention was signed in 1849, which secured the free
navigation of the Paraná and the independence of the Banda Oriental. The
downfall of Rosas was at last brought about by the instrumentality of
Justo José de Urquiza, who as governor of Entre Rios, had for many years
been one of his strongest supporters. The breach between the two men
which led to open collision took place in 1846. The first efforts of
Urquiza to rouse the country against the oppressor were unsuccessful,
but in 1851 he concluded an alliance with Brazil, to which Uruguay
afterwards adhered. A large army of twenty-four thousand men was
collected at Montevideo, and on the 8th of January 1852 the allied
forces crossed the Paraná and the road to Buenos Aires lay open before
them. Rosas met the allies at the head of a body of troops fully equal
in numbers to their own, but was crushingly routed, February 3rd, at
Monte Caseros, about 10 m. from the capital. The dictator fled for
refuge to the British legation, from whence he was conveyed on board
H.B.M.S. "Locust," which carried him into exile.

  Urquiza president.

  Buenos Aires and the provinces.

A provisional government was formed under Urquiza, and the Brazilian and
Uruguayan troops withdrew. He summoned all the provincial governors at
San Nicolás in the province of Buenos Aires, and on the 31st of May they
proclaimed a new constitution, with Urquiza as provisional director of
the Argentine nation. A constituent congress, in which each province had
equal representation, was duly elected, and in order to provide against
the predominance of Buenos Aires, it was determined that Sante Fé should
be the place of session. But this did not suit the _porteños_, as the
people of Buenos Aires were called, and the province refused to take any
part in the congressional proceedings. But Urquiza was a man of
different temperament from Rosas, and when he found that Buenos Aires
refused to submit to his authority, he declined to use force. The
congress had (May 1, 1853) appointed Urquiza president of the
confederation, and he established the seat of government at Paraná. The
province of Buenos Aires was recognized as an independent state, and
under the enlightened administration of Doctor Obligado made rapid
strides in commercial prosperity. The two sections of the Argentine
nation contrived to exist as separate governments without an open breach
of the peace until 1859, when the long-continued tension led to the
outbreak of hostilities. The army of the _porteños_, commanded by
Colonel Bartolomé Mitre, was defeated at Cepeda by the confederate
forces under Urquiza, and Buenos Aires agreed to re-enter the
confederation (November 11, 1859). Urquiza at this juncture resigned the
presidency, and Doctor Santiago Derqui was elected president of the
fourteen provinces with the seat of government at Paraná; while Urquiza
became once more governor of Entre Rios, and Mitre was appointed
governor of Buenos Aires.

  Mitre president.

  Paraguay war.

The struggle for supremacy between Buenos Aires and the provinces had,
however, to be fought out, and hostilities once more broke out in 1861.
The armies of the opposing parties, under Generals Mitre and Urquiza
respectively, met at Pavón in the province of Santa Fé (September 17).
The battle ended in the disastrous defeat of the provincial forces;
General Mitre used his victory in a spirit of moderation and sincere
patriotism. He was elected president of the Argentine confederation and
did his utmost to settle the questions which had led to so many civil
wars, on a permanent and sound basis. The constitution of 1853 was
maintained, but Buenos Aires became the seat of federal government
without ceasing to be a provincial capital. Causes of friction still
remained, but they did not develop into open quarrels, for Mitre was
content to leave Urquiza in his province of Entre Rios, and the other
administrators (_caudillos_) in their several governments, a large
measure of autonomy, trusting that the position and growing commercial
importance of Buenos Aires would inevitably tend to make the federal
capital the real centre of power of the republic. In 1865 the Argentines
were forced into war with Paraguay through the overbearing attitude of
the president Francisco Solano Lopez. The dictator of Paraguay had
quarrelled with Brazil for its intervention in the internal affairs of
Uruguay, and he demanded free passage for his troops across the
Argentine province of Corrientes. This Mitre refused, and alliance was
formed between Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, for joint action against
Lopez. General Mitre became commander-in-chief of the combined armies
for the invasion of Paraguay and was absent for several years in the
field. The struggle was severe and attended by heavy losses, and it was
not until 1870 that the Paraguayans were conquered, Lopez killed, and
peace concluded (see PARAGUAY). Meanwhile, disturbances had broken out
in the interior of Argentina (1867), which compelled Mitre to relinquish
his command in Paraguay, and to call back a large part of the Argentine
forces to suppress the insurrection. The rebels had hoped for assistance
from Urquiza, but the powerful governor of Entre Rios maintained the
peace in his province, which under his firm and beneficent rule had
greatly prospered, and the revolutionary movement was quickly subdued.

  Sarmiento president.

In 1868 the term of General Mitre came to an end, and Doctor Domingo
Faustino Sarmiento, a native of San Juan, was quietly elected to succeed
him. His conduct of affairs was broad-minded and upright, and was
characterized by earnest efforts to promote education and to develop the
resources of the country. His period of office was marked by the rapid
advance of Buenos Aires in population and prosperity, and by an
expansion of trade that was unfortunately accompanied by financial
extravagance. The war with Paraguay left a legacy of disputes concerning
boundaries which almost led to war between the two victorious allies,
Argentina and Brazil, but by the exertions of Mitre, who was sent at the
close of 1872 as special envoy to Rio, a settlement was arrived at and
friendly relations restored. The month of April 1870 saw an insurrection
in Entre Rios headed by the _caudillo_, Lopez Jordan. Urquiza was
assassinated, and the provincial legislature, through fear, at once
proclaimed Lopez Jordan governor. The federal government refused to
acknowledge the new governor, and troops were despatched by Sarmiento
against Entre Rios. The contest lasted with varying success for more
than a year, but finally Lopez Jordan was completely defeated and driven
into exile.

  Avellaneda president.

  The Tiro Nacional.

The presidential election of 1874 resolved itself, as so often before,
into a struggle between the provincials and the _porteños_ (Buenos
Aires). The candidate of the former, Dr Nicolas Avellaneda, triumphed
over General Mitre, not without suspicions of tampering with the
returns; and the unsuccessful party appealed to arms. The new president,
however, who was installed in office on the 12th of October, took active
steps to suppress the revolution, which never assumed a really serious
character. The government troops gained two decisive victories over the
insurgents under Generals Mitre and Arredondo, and they were compelled
to surrender at discretion. But though peace was for a time restored,
the old causes of soreness and dissension remained unappeased, and as
the time for the next presidential election began to draw near, it
became more and more evident that a critical struggle was at hand, and
that the people of Buenos Aires, supported by the province of
Corrientes, were determined to bring to an issue the question as to what
position Buenos Aires was to hold for the future with regard to the
remaining provinces of the confederation. It was evident that the
president intended to use all the influence which the party in power
could exercise, to secure the return of General Julio Roca, who had
distinguished himself in 1878 by a successful campaign against the
warlike Indian tribes bordering on the Andes. The _porteños_ on their
part were determined to resist this policy to the utmost. Mass meetings
were held, and a committee was appointed for the purpose of considering
what action should be taken to defeat the ambitious designs of the
provincials. Under the direction of this committee, the association
known as the "Tiro Nacional" was formed, with the avowed object of
training the able-bodied citizens of Buenos Aires in military exercises
and creating a volunteer army, ready for service if called upon, to
withstand by force the pretensions of their opponents. The establishment
of the Tiro Nacional was enthusiastically received by all classes in
Buenos Aires, the men turning out regularly to drill, and the women
aiding the movement by collecting subscriptions for the purpose of
armament and other necessaries. On the 13th of February 1880, the
minister of war, Dr Carlos Pellegrini, summoned the principal officers
connected with the Tiro Nacional, General Bartolomé Mitre, his brother
Emilio, Colonel Julio Campos, Colonel Hilario Lagos and others, and
warned them that as officers of the national army they owed obedience to
the national government, and would be severely punished if concerned in
any revolutionary outbreak against the constituted authorities. The
reply to this threat was the immediate resignation of their commissions
by all the officers connected with the Tiro Nacional. Two days later,
the national government occupied, with a strong force of infantry and
artillery, the parade ground at Palermo used by the Buenos Aires
volunteers for drill purposes. A great meeting of citizens was then
called and marched through the streets. President Avellaneda was
frightened at the results of his action, and to avoid a collision
ordered the troops to be withdrawn. Negotiations were now opened by the
government with the provincial authorities for the disarmament of the
city and province of Buenos Aires, but they led to nothing. Matters
became still further strained on account of the outrages committed by
the national troops, and such was the bitterness of feeling developed
between the two factions, that an appeal to arms became inevitable.

  Appeal to Arms.

  Fall of Buenos Aires.

In the month of June 1880, President Avellaneda and his ministers left
Buenos Aires, and this act was considered by the _porteño_ leaders
equivalent to a declaration of war. The national government and the
twelve provinces forming the Córdoba League, were ranged on one side;
the city and province of Buenos Aires and the province of Corrientes on
the other. The national troops were well armed with Remington rifles,
provided with abundant ammunition, equipped with artillery and supported
by the fleet. In the city and province of Buenos Aires, plenty of
volunteers offered their services, and an army of some twenty-five
thousand men was quickly raised, but they were armed with old-fashioned
weapons and there was only a limited supply of ammunition. Feverish
attempts were made to remedy the lack of warlike stores, but difficulty
was experienced on account of the fleet blockading the entrance to the
river. After several skirmishes, the national army commanded by General
Roca, containing many troops seasoned in Indian campaigns, assaulted the
_porteños_ posted before Buenos Aires, and after two days' hard fighting
(20th and 21st July) forced its way into the town. On 23rd July the
surrender of the city was demanded and obtained. The terms of the
surrender were that all the leaders of the revolution should be removed
from positions of authority, all government employees implicated in the
movement dismissed, and the force in the province and city of Buenos
Aires at once disarmed and disbanded. The power of Buenos Aires was thus
completely broken and at the mercy of the Córdoba League. The _porteños_
were no longer in a position to nominate a candidate in opposition to
General Julio Roca, who was duly elected. He assumed office in October
1880.

  Roca president.

Hitherto General Roca had been regarded only in his capacity as a
soldier, and not from the point of view of an administrator. In the
campaigns against the Indians in the south-west of the province of
Buenos Aires and the valley of the Rio Negro he had gained much
prestige; the victory over Buenos Aires added to his fame, and secured
his authority in the outlying provincial centres. One of the first
notable acts of the Roca administration was to declare the city of
Buenos Aires the property of the national government. This separation of
the city from the province, and its federalization had been one of the
chief aims of the Córdoba League, and was the natural consequence of the
crushing defeat inflicted on the _porteños_. As a sequel to this step,
in 1884 the town of La Plata was declared to be the capital of the
province of Buenos Aires, and the provincial administration was moved to
that place. This federalization of the capital has proved to be a most
important factor in binding together the different parts of the
confederation, and in promoting the evolution of an Argentine nation out
of a loosely cemented union of a number of semi-independent states.

Considering the circumstances in which General Roca assumed office, it
must be admitted that he showed great moderation and used the
practically absolute power that he possessed to establish a strong
central government, and to initiate a national policy, which aimed at
furthering the prosperity and development of the whole country. He was
able by the influence he exerted to keep down the internal dissensions
and insurrectionary outbreaks which had so greatly impeded for many
years the development of the vast natural resources of the republic.
With this object he had promoted the extension of railways so as to link
the provinces with the great port of Buenos Aires, and to provide at the
same time facilities for the rapid despatch of military forces to
disturbed districts. Unfortunately the last two years of Roca's term of
office were marked by two grave errors, which subsequently caused
widespread suffering and distress throughout the country. The first of
these mistakes was a measure making (January 1885) the currency
inconvertible for a period of two years. This act, which was only
decided upon after much hesitation, had a most deleterious effect upon
the national credit. The second was the nomination of Dr Miguel Juarez
Celman for the presidential term commencing in October 1886. The
nomination was brought about by the Córdoba clique, and Roca lacked the
moral courage to oppose the decision of this group, though he was well
aware that Celman, who was his brother-in-law, was neither
intellectually nor morally fitted for the post.

  Celman president.

  The Union Civica.

No sooner had President Juarez Celman come into power towards the close
of 1886, than the respectable portion of the community began to feel
alarmed at the methods practised by the new president in his conduct of
public affairs. At first it was hoped that the influence of General Roca
would serve to check any serious extravagance on the part of Celman.
This hope, however, was doomed to disappointment, and before many months
had elapsed it was clear that the president would listen to no prudent
counsels from Roca or from any one else. The men of the old Córdoba
League became dominant in all branches of the government, and
carpet-bagging politicians occupied every official post. In their hurry
to obtain wealth, this crowd of office-mongers from the provinces lent
themselves to all kinds of bribery and corruption. The public credit was
pledged at home and abroad to fill the pockets of the adventurers, and
the wildest excesses were committed under the guise of administrative
acts. What followed in the second and third years of the Celman
administration can only adequately be described as a debauchery of the
national honour, of the national resources, of the rights of Argentines
as citizens of the republic. Buenos Aires was still prostrate under the
crushing blow of the misfortunes of 1880, and lacked strength and power
of organization necessary to raise any effective protest against the
proceedings of Celman and his friends when the true character of these
proceedings was first understood. The conduct of public affairs,
however, at length became so scandalous, that action on the part of the
more sober-minded and conservative sections was seen to be absolutely
imperative if the country was to be saved from speedy and certain ruin.
In 1889 the association of the "Union Civica" was founded, and the
organization undertaken by Dr Leandro Alem, Dr Aristobulo del Valle, Dr
Bernardo Irigoyen, Dr Vicente Lopez, Dr Lucio Lopez, Dr Oscar Lilliedale
and other leading citizens. The untiring energy and zeal of Leandro Alem
fitted him for being the chief organizer of a movement into which he
threw himself heart and soul. Mass meetings were held in Buenos Aires,
and it fell specially to the lot of Dr del Valle, who was an able orator
as well as a sincere patriot, to expose the irresponsible and corrupt
character of the administration, and the terrible dangers that
threatened the republic through its reckless extravagance and financial
improvidence. Subsidiary clubs affiliated to the central administration
were formed throughout the length and breadth of the country, and
millions of leaflets and pamphlets were distributed broadcast to explain
the importance of the movement. President Celman underrated the strength
of the new opposition, and relied upon his armed forces promptly to
suppress any signs of open hostility. No change was made in official
methods, and the condition of affairs drifted from bad to worse, until
the temper of the people, so long and so sorely tried, showed plainly
that the situation had become insufferable. The Union Civica then
decided to make a bold bid for freedom by attempting forcibly to eject
Celman and his clique from office.

On the night of the 26th of July 1890 the Union Civica called its
members to arms. It was joined by some regiments of the regular army and
received the support of the fleet. Barricades were thrown up in the
principal streets, and the surrounding houses were occupied by the
insurgents. Two days of desultory street fighting ensued, during which
the fleet began to bombard the city, but was compelled to desist by the
interference of foreign men-of-war, on the ground that the bombardment
was causing unnecessary damage to the life and property of
non-combatants. A suspension of hostilities then took place, and
negotiations were opened between the contending parties. Celman, acting
upon the advice of General Roca, who recognized the strength of public
opinion in the outbreak, placed his resignation in the hands of congress
on the 31st of July. A scene of intense enthusiasm followed, and Buenos
Aires was _en fête_ for the following three days. The vice-president of
the confederation, Carlos Pellegrini, who had been minister of war under
presidents Avellaneda and Roca and had had much administrative
experience, succeeded without opposition to the vacant post.

  Pellegrini president.

Much satisfaction was shown in Europe at the fall of President Celman,
for investors had suffered heavily by the way in which the resources of
Argentina had been dissipated by a corrupt government, and hopes were
entertained that the uprising of public opinion against his financial
methods signified a more honest conduct of the national affairs in the
future. Great expectations were entertained of the ability of President
Pellegrini to establish a sound administration, and he succeeded in
forming a ministry which gave general satisfaction throughout the
country. General Roca was induced to undertake the duties of minister of
the interior, and his influence in the provinces was sufficient to check
any attempts to stir up disturbances at Córdoba or elsewhere. The most
onerous post of all, that of minister of finance, was confided to Dr
Vicente Lopez, who, though he was not of marked financial ability, was
at least a man of untiring industry and of a personal integrity that was
above suspicion. But the economic and financial situation was one of
almost hopeless embarrassment and confusion, and Pellegrini proved
himself incapable of grappling with it. Instead of facing the
difficulties, the president preferred to put off the day of reckoning by
flooding the country with inconvertible notes, with the result that the
financial crisis became more and more aggravated. Through the rapid
depreciation of Argentine credit, the great firm of Baring Brothers, the
financial agents of the government in London, became so heavily involved
that they were forced into liquidation, November 1890. The consequences
of this catastrophe were felt far and wide, and in the spring of 1891
both the Banco Nacional and the Banco de la provincia de Buenos Aires
were unable to meet their obligations. Amidst this sea of financial
troubles the government drifted helplessly on, without showing any
inclination or capacity to initiate a strong policy of reform in the
methods of administration which had done so much to ruin the country.

It is little wonder that, in these circumstances, the choice of a
successor to Pellegrini, whose term of office expired in 1892, should
have been felt to possess peculiar importance. General Bartolomé Mitre
was proposed by the _porteños_ as their candidate. He had been absent
from Argentina on a journey to Europe, and on his return in April 1891,
a popular reception was given to him at which 50,000 persons attended. A
petition was presented to him begging him to be a candidate for the
presidency, and with some reluctance the veteran leader gave his
consent. His partisans, however, found themselves confronted by a
compact provincial party, who proposed to put forward the other strong
man of the republic, General Roca, to oppose him. But the two generals
were equally averse to a contest _à outrance_, which could only end in
civil war. They met accordingly at a conference known as _El Acuerdo_,
and it was arranged that both should withdraw, and that a non-party
candidate should be selected who should receive the support of them
both. The choice fell upon Dr Saenz Peña, a judge of the supreme court,
and a man universally respected, who had never taken any part in
political life. This compact aroused the bitter enmity of Dr Leandro
Alem, who did his utmost to stir up the Union Civica to a campaign
against the neutral candidate. Finding that the more conservative
section of the union would not follow him, Alem formed a new association
to which he gave the name of Union Civica Radical. Such was his energy,
that soon a network of branches of the Union Civica Radical was
organized throughout the republic, and Dr Bernardo Irigoyen was put
forward as a rival candidate to Dr Saenz Peña. But Alem was not content
with constitutional opposition to the Acuerdo, and his movement soon
assumed the character of a revolutionary propaganda against the national
government. His violence gave Pellegrini the opportunity of taking
active steps to preserve the peace. In April 1892 Alem and his chief
colleagues were arrested and sent into exile.

In the following month (May), the presidential elections were held; Dr
Saenz Peña was declared duly elected, and Dr José Uriburu, the minister
in Chile, was chosen as vice-president.

  Saenz Peña president.

The idea of Dr Saenz Peña was to conduct the government on common sense
and non-partisan lines, in fact to translate into practical politics the
principles which underlay the compromise of the Acuerdo. He was a
straightforward and honourable man, who tried his best to do his duty in
a position that had been forced upon him, and was in no sense of the
word his own seeking. No sooner, however, was he installed in office
than difficulties began to crop up on all sides, and he quickly
discovered that to attempt to govern without the aid of a majority in
congress was practically impossible. He had had no experience of
political life, and he refused to create the support he needed by using
his presidential prerogative to build up a political majority.
Obstruction met his well-meant efforts to promote the general good, and
before twelve months of the presidential term had run public affairs
were at a deadlock. Dr Alem, who had been permitted to return from
exile, was not slow to profit by the occasion. Embittered by his
treatment in 1892, he openly preached the advisability of an armed
rising to overthrow the existing administration. Public opinion had been
outraged by the immunity with which the governors of certain provinces,
and more particularly Dr Julio Costa, the governor of the province of
Buenos Aires, had been allowed to maintain local forces, by the aid of
which they exacted the payment of illegal taxes and exercised other acts
of injustice and oppression. A number of officers of the army and navy
agreed to lend assistance to a revolutionary outbreak, and towards the
end of July 1893 matters came to a head. The population of Buenos Aires
assembled in armed bodies with the avowed intention of ejecting the
governor from office, and electing in his stead a man who would give
them a just administration. The president was for some time in doubt
whether he had any right to intervene in provincial affairs, but
eventually troops were despatched to La Plata. There was no serious
fighting. Negotiations were soon opened which quickly led to the
resignation of Costa, and the return of the insurgents to their homes.
While these disturbances were taking place in the province of Buenos
Aires, another revolutionary rising was in progress in Santa Fé. Here
the efforts of Dr Alem succeeded in supplying a large body of rebels
with arms and ammunition, and he was able, by a bold attack, to seize
the town of Rosario and there establish the revolutionary headquarters.
This capture so alarmed the national government that a force was sent
under the command of Roca to put down the insurrection. The revolt
speedily collapsed before this redoubtable commander, and Alem and the
other leaders surrendered. They were sentenced to banishment in Staten
Island at the pleasure of the federal government.

But the suppression of disorder did not relieve the tension between the
congress and the executive. During the whole of the 1894 session, the
attitude of senators and deputies alike was one of pronounced hostility
to the president. All his acts were opposed, legislation was at a
standstill and every effort was made to force Dr Saenz Peña to resign.
But although he experienced the utmost difficulty in forming a cabinet,
the president was obstinate in his determination to retain office
without identifying himself with any party. A definite issue was
therefore sought by the congress on which to join battle, and it arose
out of the death sentences which had been pronounced on certain naval
and military officers who had been implicated in the Santa Fé outbreak.
The president had made up his mind that the sentence must be carried
out; the congress by a great majority were resolved not to permit the
death penalty to be inflicted. It was a one-sided struggle, for without
the consent of the congress the president could not raise any money for
supplies, and congress refused to vote the budget. But heavy expenses
had been incurred in putting down revolutionary movements in various
parts of the provinces, and war with Chile was threatened upon the
question of a dispute concerning the boundaries between the two
republics. In January 1895 a special session of congress was summoned to
take into consideration the financial proposals of the government, which
included an increase in the naval and military estimates. Congress,
however, had now got their opportunity, and they used the time of
national stress to bring increased pressure to bear upon the president.
On the 21st of January Dr Saenz Peña at last perceived that his position
was untenable, and he handed in his resignation. It was accepted at once
by the chambers, and the vice-president, Dr José Uriburu, became
president of the republic for the three years and nine months of Peña's
term which remained unexpired.

  Uriburu President.

Uriburu was neither a politician nor a statesman, but had spent the
greater portion of his life abroad in the diplomatic service. His
knowledge of foreign affairs was, however, peculiarly useful at a
juncture when boundary questions were the subjects that chiefly
attracted public attention. After disputes with Brazil, extending over
fifteen years, about the territory of "Misiones," the matter had been
submitted to the arbitration of the president of the United States. In
March 1895 President Cleveland gave his decision, which was wholly
favourable to the contention of Brazil. The Argentine government, though
disappointed at the result, accepted the award loyally. The boundary
dispute with Chile, to which reference has already been made, was of a
more serious character. The dispute was of old standing. Already in 1884
a protocol had been signed between the contending parties, by which it
was agreed that the frontier should follow the line where "the highest
peaks of the Andine ranges divide the watershed." This definition
unfortunately ignored the fact that the Andes do not run from north to
south in one continuous line, but are separated into cordilleras with
valleys between them, and covering in their total breadth a considerable
extent of country. Difference of opinion, therefore, arose as to the
interpretation of the protocol, the Argentines insisting that the
boundary should run from highest peak to highest peak, the Chileans that
it should follow the highest points of the watershed. The quarrel at
length became acute, and on both sides the populace clamoured from time
to time for an appeal to arms, and the resources of both countries were
squandered in military and naval preparations for a struggle.
Nevertheless despite these obstacles, President Uriburu did something
during his term of office to relieve the nation's financial
difficulties. In 1896 a bill was passed by congress, which authorized
the state by the issue of national bonds to assume the provincial
external indebtedness. This proof of the desire of the Argentine
government to meet honestly all its obligations did much to restore its
credit abroad. Uriburu found in 1897 the financial position so far
improved that he was able to resume cash payments on the entire foreign
debt.

  Roca President.

In 1898 there was another presidential election. Public opinion, excited
by the prospect of a war with Chile, naturally supported the candidature
of General Roca, and he was elected without opposition (12th October
1898). The first question which he had to handle was the Chilean
boundary dispute. During the last months of President Uriburu's
administration, matters had reached a climax, especially in connexion
with the delimitation in a district known as the Puña de Atacama. In
August an ultimatum was received from Chile demanding arbitration. After
some hesitation, on the advice of Roca the Argentines agreed to the
demand, and peace was maintained. The principle of arbitration being
accepted, the conditions were quickly arranged. The question of the Puña
de Atacama was referred to a tribunal composed of the United States
minister to Argentina and of one Argentine and one Chilean delegate;
that of the southern frontier in Patagonia to the British crown. One of
the first steps of President Roca, after his accession to office, was to
arrange a meeting with the president of Chile at the Straits of
Magellan. At their conference all difficulties were discussed and
settled, and an undertaking was given on both sides to put a stop to
warlike preparations. The decision of the representative of the United
States was given in April 1899. Although the Chileans professed
dissatisfaction, no active opposition was raised, and the terms were
duly ratified. In his message to congress, on the 1st of May 1899,
General Roca spoke strongly of the immediate necessity of a reform in
the methods of administering justice, the expediency of a revision of
the electoral law, and the imperative need of a reconstruction of the
department of public instruction. The administration of justice, he
declared, had fallen to so low an ebb as to be practically non-existent.
By the powerful influence of the president, government measures were
sanctioned by the legislature dealing with the abuses which had been
condemned. On the 31st of August of the same year a series of proposals
upon the currency question was submitted to congress by the president,
whose real object was to counteract the too rapid appreciation of the
inconvertible paper money. The official value of the dollar was fixed at
44 cents gold for all government purposes. The violent fluctuations in
the value of the paper dollar, which caused so much damage to trade and
industry, were thus checked. In October 1900 Dr Manuel Campos Salles,
president of Brazil, paid a visit to Buenos Aires, and was received with
great demonstrations of friendliness. The aggressive attitude of Chile
towards Bolivia was causing considerable anxiety, and Argentina and
Brazil wished to show that they were united in opposing a policy which
aimed at acquiring an extension of territory by force of arms. The
feeling of enmity between Chile and Argentina was indeed anything but
extinct. The delay of the arbitration tribunal in London in giving its
decision in the matter of the disputed boundary in Patagonia led to a
crop of wild rumours being disseminated, and to a revival of animosity
between the two peoples. In December 1901 warlike preparations were
being carried on in both states, and the outbreak of active hostilities
appeared to be imminent. At the critical moment the British government,
urged to move in the matter by the British residents in both countries,
who feared that war would mean the financial ruin of both Chile and
Argentina, used its utmost influence both at Santiago and Buenos Aires
to allay the misunderstandings; and negotiations were set on foot which
ended in a treaty for the cessation of further armaments being signed,
June 1902. The award of King Edward VII. upon the delimitation of the
boundary was given a few months later, and was received without
controversy and ratified by both governments.

  Quintana and Alcorta Presidents.

To the calm resourcefulness and level-headedness of President Roca at a
very difficult and critical juncture must be largely ascribed the
preservation of peace, and the permanent removal of a dispute that had
aroused so much irritation. His term of office came to an end in 1904,
when Dr Manuel Quintana was elected president and Dr José Figueroa
Alcorta vice-president, both having Roca's support. Dr Quintana at the
time of his election was sixty-four years of age. He proved a
hard-working progressive president, who did much for the development of
communications and the opening up of the interior of the country. He
died amidst general regret in March 1906, and was succeeded by Dr
Alcorta for the remaining years of his term. (G. E.)

  AUTHORITIES.--C.E. Akers, _Argentine, Patagonian and Chilian
  Sketches_ (London, 1893), and _A History of South America 1854-1904_
  (New York, 1905); Theodore Child, _The Spanish-American Republics_
  (London, 1891); Sir T.H. Holdich, _The Countries of the King's Award_
  (London, 1904); W.H. Hudson, _The Naturalist in La Plata_ (London,
  1892), and _Idle Days in Patagonia_ (London, 1893); A.H. Keane and C.
  R. Markham, _Central and South America_, in Stanford's "Compendium of
  Geography and Travel" (London, 1901); G.E. Church, "Argentine
  Geography and the Ancient Pampean Sea" (_Geogr. Journal_, xii. p.
  386); "South America: an Outline of its Physical Geography" (_Geogr.
  Journal_, xvii. p. 333); Dr Karl Kärger, _Landwirtschaft und
  Kolonisation im spanischen Amerika_ (2 vols., Leipzig, 1901); F.P.
  Moreno, "Explorations in Patagonia" (_Geogr. Journal_, xiv. pp. 241,
  354); Carlos Lix Klett, _Estudios sobre producción, comercio, finanzas
  e interesses generales de la Republica Argentina_ (2 vols., Buenos
  Aires, 1900); G. Carrasco, _El crecimiento de la población de la
  Republica Argentina comparado con el de las principales naciones
  1890-1903_ (Buenos Aires, 1904); C.M. Urien and C. Colombo,
  _Geografia Argentina_ (Buenos Aires, 1905); E. von Rosen,
  _Archaeological Researches on the Frontier of Argentina and Bolivia
  1901-1902_ (Stockholm, 1904); Arturo B. Carranza, _Constitución
  Nacional y Constituciones Provinciales Vigentes_ (Buenos Aires, 1898);
  Angelo de Gubernatis, _L'Argentina_ (Firenze, 1898); Meliton Gonzales,
  _El Gran Chaco Argentino_ (Buenos Aires, 1890); John Grant & Sons,
  _The Argentine Year Book_ (Buenos Aires, 1902 et seq.); Francis
  Latzina, _Diccionario Geografico Argentino_ (Buenos Aires, 1891);
  _Géographie de la République Argentine_ (Buenos Aires, 1890);
  _L'Agriculture et l'Elevage dans la République Argentine_ (Paris,
  1889); Bartolomé Mitre, _Historia de San Martin y de la Emancipatión
  Sud-Americana, según nuevos documentos_ (3 vols., Buenos Aires, 1887);
  _Historia de Belgrano y de la Independencia Argentina_ (3 vols.,
  Buenos Aires, 1883); Felipe Soldan, _Diccionario Geografico
  Estadistico Nacional Argentino_ (Buenos Aires, 1885); Thomas A.
  Turner, _Argentina and the Argentines_ (New York and London, 1892);
  Estanislao S. Zeballos, _Descripción Amena de la Republica Argentina_
  (3 vols., Buenos Aires, 1881); _Anuario de la Direción General de
  Estadistica 1898_ (Buenos Aires, 1899); Charles Wiener, _La République
  Argentine_ (Paris, 1899); _Segundo Censo República Argentina_ (3
  vols., Buenos Aires, 1898); _Handbook of the Argentine Republic_
  (Bureau of the American Republics, Washington, 1892-1903).
       (A. J. L.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] For the geology of Argentina, see Stelzner, _Beiträge zur
    geologie der argentinischen Republik_ (Cassel and Berlin, 1885);
    Brackebusch, _Mapa geológico del Interiore de la República Argentina_
    (Gotha, 1892); Valentin, _Bosquejo geólogico de la Argentina_ (Buenos
    Aires, 1897); Hauthal, "Beiträge zur Geologie der argentinischen
    Provinz Buenos Aires," _Peterm. Mitt._ vol. 1., 1904, pp. 83-92,
    112-117, pi. vi.

  [2] Interesting details of the Argentine fauna may be found in
    Darwin's _Voyage of the Beagle_; W.H. Hudson's _Idle Days in
    Patagonia_, and _Naturalist in the La Plata_; G. Pelleschi's _Eight
    Months on the Gran Chaco_; R. Napp's _Argentine Republic_; and de
    Moussy's _Confédération argentine_.

  [3] There are two distinct statistical offices compiling immigration
    returns and their totals do not agree, owing in part to the traffic
    between Buenos Aires and Montevideo. Another report gives the
    arrivals in 1904 as 125,567 and the departures 38,923. Of the
    arrivals 67,598 were Italians and 39,851 Spaniards. The total for the
    years 1859-1904 was 3,166,073 and the departures 1,239,064, showing a
    net gain of 1,927,009.