ARGENSOLA, LUPERCIO LEONARDO DE (1559-1613), Spanish dramatist and poet,
was baptized at Barbastro on the 14th of December 1559. He was educated
at the universities of Huesca and Saragossa, becoming secretary to the
duke de Villahermosa in 1585. He was appointed historiographer of Aragon
in 1599, and in 1610 accompanied the count de Lemos to Naples, where he
died in March 1613. His tragedies--_Filis, Isabela_ and _Alejandra_--are
said by Cervantes to have "filled all who heard them with admiration,
delight and interest"; _Filis_ is lost, and _Isabela_ and _Alejandra_,
which were not printed till 1772, are ponderous imitations of Seneca.
Argensola's poems were published with those of his brother in 1634; they
consist of excellent translations from the Latin poets, and of original
satires. His "echoing sonnets"--such as _Después que al mundo el rey
divino vino_--lend themselves to parody; but his diction is singularly
pure.

His brother, BARTOLOMÉ LEONARDO DE ARGENSOLA (1562-1631), Spanish poet
and historian, was baptized at Barbastro on the 26th of August 1562,
studied at Huesca, took orders, and was presented to the rectory of
Villahermosa in 1588. He was attached to the suite of the count de
Lemos, viceroy of Naples, in 1610, and succeeded his brother as
historiographer of Aragon in 1613. He died at Saragossa on the 4th of
February 1631. His principal prose works are the _Conquista de las Islas
Molucas_ (1609), and a supplement to Zurita's _Anales de Aragón_, which
was published in 1630. His poems (1634), like those of his elder
brother, are admirably finished examples of pungent wit. His
commentaries on contemporary events, and his _Alteraciones populares_,
dealing with a Saragossa rising in 1591, are lost. An interesting life
of this writer by Father Miguel Mir precedes a reprint of the _Conquista
de las Islas Molucas_, issued at Saragossa in 1891.