ARGEI, the name given by the ancient Romans to a number of rush puppets
(24 or 27 according to the reading of Varro, _de Ling_. _lat_. vii. 44,
or 30 according to Dionysius i. 38) resembling men tied hand and foot,
which were taken down to the ancient bridge over the Tiber (_pans
sublicius_) on the 14th of May by the pontifices and magistrates, with
the flaminica Dialis in mourning guise, and there thrown into the Tiber
by the Vestal virgins. There were also in various parts of the four
Servian regions of the city a number of _sacella Argeorum_ (chapels),
round which a procession seems to have gone on the 17th of March (Varro,
_L.L._ v. 46-54; Jordan, _Rom. Topogr._ vol. ii. 603), and it has been
conjectured that the puppets were kept in these chapels until the time
came for them to be cast into the river. The Romans had no historical
explanation of these curious rites, and neither the theories of their
scholars nor the beliefs of the common people, who fancied that the
puppets were substitutes for old men who used at one time to be
sacrificed to the river, are worth serious consideration. Recently two
explanations have been given: (1) that of W. Mannhardt, who by comparing
numerous examples of similar customs among other European peoples
arrived at the conclusion that the rite was of extreme antiquity and of
dramatic rather than sacrificial character, and that its object was
possibly to procure rain; (2) that of Wissowa, who refuses to date it
farther back than the latter half of the 3rd century B.C., and sees in
it the yearly representation of an original sacrifice of twenty-seven
captive Greeks (taking Argei as a Latin form of [Greek: Argeioi]) by
drowning in the Tiber. This second theory is, however, not borne out by
any Roman historical record.

  See Wissowa's arguments in the article "Argei" in his edition of
  Pauly's _Realencydopadie_. For the other view see W. Mannhardt,
  _Antike Wald und Feldkulte_, 178 foll.; W.W. Fowler, _Roman
  Festivals_, pp. 111 foll.     (W. W. F.*)