ARGHANDAB, a river of Afghanistan, about 250 m. in length. It rises in
the Hazara country north-west of Ghazni, and flowing south-west falls
into the Helmund 20 m. below Girishk. Very little is known about its
upper course. It is said to be shallow, and to run nearly dry in height
of summer; but when its depth exceeds 3 ft. its great rapidity makes it
a serious obstacle to travellers. In its lower course it is much used
for irrigation, and the valley is cultivated and populous; yet the water
is said to be somewhat brackish. It is doubtful whether the ancient
Arachotus is to be identified with the Arghandab or with its chief
confluent the Tarnak, which joins it on the left about 30 m. S. W. of
Kandahar. The two rivers run nearly parallel, inclosing the backbone of
the Ghilzai plateau. The Tarnak is much the shorter (length about 200
m.) and less copious. The ruins at Ulân Robât, supposed to represent the
city Arachosia, are in its basin; and the lake known as Ab-i-Istâda, the
most probable representative of Lake Arachotus, is near the head of the
Tarnak, though not communicating with it. The Tarnak is dammed for
irrigation at intervals, and in the hot season almost exhausted. There
is a good deal of cultivation along the river, but few villages. The
high road from Kabul to Kandahar passes this way (another reason for
supposing the Tarnak to be Arachotus), and the people live off the road
to avoid the onerous duties of hospitality.