ARGHOUL, ARGHOOL, or ARGHUL (in the Egyptian hieroglyphs, AS or
AS-IT),[1] an ancient and modern Egyptian and Arab wood-wind instrument,
with cylindrical bore and single reed mouthpiece of the clarinet type.
The arghoul consists of two reed pipes of unequal lengths bound together
by means of waxed thread, so that the two mouthpieces lie side by side,
and can be taken by the performer into his mouth at the same time. The
mouthpiece consists of a reed having a small tongue detached by means of
a longitudinal slit which forms the beating reed, as in the clarinet
mouthpiece. The shorter pipe has six holes on which the melody is
played; the three upper holes being covered by the fingers of the right
hand, and the lower by those of the left hand. The longer pipe has no
lateral holes; it is a drone pipe with one note only, which, however,
can be varied by the addition of extra lengths of reed. In the
illustration all three lengths are shown in use. An arghoul belonging to
the collection of the Conservatoire Royal at Brussels, described by
Victor Mahillon in his catalogue[2] (No. 113), gives the following
scale:--

[Illustration: SHORT PIPE.
  Holes uncovered.]

[Illustration: DRONE PIPE.
  Without additional joint.
  With shortest additional joint.
  With shortest and medium additional joints.
  With longest additional joint.]

[Illustration: (From Edward William Lane's _An Account of the Manners
and Customs of the Modern Egyptians_.)

Modern Arghoul, 3 ft. 2½ in. long.]

The total length of the shorter pipe, including the mouthpiece, is 0.435
m.; of the longer pipe, without additional joints, 0.555 m. An Egyptian
arghoul,[3] presented by the khedive to the Victoria and Albert Museum,
measures 4 ft. 8½ in.

  For further information see Victor Loret, _L'Egypte au temps des
  Pharaons_ (Paris, 1889), 8vo, pp. 139, 143, 144; G.A. Villoteau,
  _Description historique technique et littéraire des instruments de
  musique des orientaux_ (_Description de l'Egypte_, Paris, 1823, tome
  xiii, pp. 456-473). (K. S.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] See Victor Loret. "Les Flûtes égyptiennes antiques," _Journal
    Asiatique_, 8ème série, tome xiv., Paris, 1889, pp. 129, 130 and 132.

  [2] _Catalogue descriptif et analytique du musée du Conservatoire
    Royal de Bruxelles_ (Ghent, 1880), p. 141.

  [3] _A Descriptive Catalogue of the Musical Instruments in the South
    Kensington Museum_, by Carl Engel (London, 1874), p. 143.