ARGUMENT, a word meaning "proof," "evidence," corresponding in English
to the Latin word _argumentum_, from which it is derived; the
originating Latin verb _arguere_, to make clear, from which comes the
English "argue," is from a root meaning bright, appearing in Greek
[Greek: argaes], white. From its primary sense are derived such
applications of the word as a chain of reasoning, a fact or reason given
to support a proposition, a discussion of the evidence or reasons for or
against some theory or proposition and the like. More particularly
"argument" means a synopsis of the contents of a book, the outline of a
novel, play, &c. In logic it is used for the middle term in a syllogism,
and for many species of fallacies, such as the _argumentum ad hominem,
ad baculum_, &c. (see FALLACY). In mathematics the term has received
special meanings; in mathematical tables the "argument" is the quantity
upon which the other quantities in the table are made to depend; in the
theory of complex variables, e.g. such as a + ib where i = [root](-1),
the "argument" (or "amplitude") is the angle [theta] given by tan
[theta] = b/a. In astronomy, the term is used in connexion with the
Ptolemaic theory to denote the angular distance on the epicycle of a
planet from the true apogee of the epicycle; and the "equation to the
argument" is the angle subtended at the earth by the distance of a
planet from the centre of the epicycle.