ARICIA (mod. _Ariccia_), an ancient city of Latium, on the Via Appia, 16
m. S.E. of Rome. The old town, or at any rate its acropolis, now
occupied by the modern town, lay high (1350 ft. above sea-level) above
the circular Valle Aricciana, which is probably an extinct volcanic
crater; some remains of its fortifications, consisting of a mound of
earth supported on each side by a wall of rectangular blocks of peperino
stone, have been discovered (D. Marchetti, in _Notizie degli scavi_,
1892, 52). The lower town was situated on the north edge of the valley,
close to the Via Appia, which descended into the valley from the modern
Albano, and re-ascended partly upon very fine substructions of _opus
quadratum_, some 200 yds. in length, to the modern Genzano. Remains of
the walls of the lower town, of the _cella_ of a temple built of blocks
of peperino, and also of later buildings in brickwork and _opus
reticulatum_, connected with the post-station (Aricia being the first
important station out of Rome, cf. Horace, _Sat._ i. 5. 1, _Egressum
magna me excepit Aricia Roma hospitio modico_) on the highroad, may
still be seen (cf. T. Ashby in _Mélanges de l'école française de Rome_,
1903, 399). Aricia was one of the oldest cities of Latium, and appears
as a serious opponent of Rome at the end of the period of the kings and
beginning of the republic. In 338 B.C. it was conquered by C. Maenius
and became a _civitas sine suffragio_, but was soon given full rights.
Even in the imperial period its chief magistrate was styled _dictator_,
and its council _senatus_, and it preserved its own calendar of
festivals. Its vegetables and wine were famous, and the district is
still fertile.     (T. As.)