ARISTARCHUS, of Samothrace (c. 220-143 B.C.), Greek grammarian and
critic, flourished about 155. He settled early in Alexandria, where he
studied under Aristophanes of Byzantium, whom he succeeded as librarian
of the museum. On the accession of the tyrant Ptolemy Physcon (his
former pupil), he found his life in danger and withdrew to Cyprus, where
he died from dropsy, hastened, it is said, by voluntary starvation, at
the age of 72. Aristarchus founded a school of philologists, called
after him "Aristarcheans," which long flourished in Alexandria and
afterwards at Rome. He is said to have written 800 commentaries alone,
without reckoning special treatises. He edited Hesiod, Pindar,
Aeschylus, Sophocles and other authors; but his chief fame rests on his
critical and exegetical edition of Homer, practically the foundation of
our present recension. In the time of Augustus, two Aristarcheans,
Didymus and Aristonicus, undertook the revision of his work, and the
extracts from these two writers in the Venetian scholia to the _Iliad_
give an idea of Aristarchus's Homeric labours. To obtain a thoroughly
correct text, he marked with an obelus the lines he considered spurious;
other signs were used by him to indicate notes, varieties of reading,
repetitions and interpolations. He arranged the _Iliad_ and the
_Odyssey_ in twenty-four books as we now have them. As a commentator his
principle was that the author should explain himself, without recourse
to allegorical interpretation; in grammar, he laid chief stress on
analogy and uniformity of usage and construction. His views were opposed
by Crates of Mallus, who wrote a treatise [Greek: Heri Anomalias],
especially directed against them.

  See Lehrs, _De Aristarchi Stud. Homericis_ (3rd ed., 1882); Ludwich,
  _Aristarchs homerische Textcritik_ (1884); especially Sandys, _Hist.
  of Class. Schol._ (ed. 1906), vol. i. with authorities; also HOMER.