ARISTIPPUS (c. 435-356 B.C.), Greek philosopher, the founder of the
Cyrenaic school, was the son of Aritadas, a merchant of Cyrene. At an
early age he came to Athens, and was induced to remain by the fame of
Socrates, whose pupil he became. Subsequently he travelled through a
number of Grecian cities, and finally settled in Cyrene, where he
founded his school. His philosophy was eminently practical (see
CYRENAICS). Starting from the two Socratic principles of virtue and
happiness, he emphasized the second, and made pleasure the criterion of
life. That he held to be good which gives the maximum of pleasure. In
pursuance of this he indulged in all forms of external luxury. At the
same time he remained thoroughly master of himself and had the
self-control to refrain or to enjoy. Diogenes Laertius (ii. 65), quoting
Phanias the peripatetic, says that he received money for his teaching,
and Aristotle (_Met_. ii. 2) expressly calls him a sophist. Diogenes
further states that he wrote several treatises, but none have survived.
The five letters attributed to him are undoubtedly spurious. His
daughter Arete, and her son Aristippus ([Greek: maetrodidaktos], "pupil
of his mother"), carried on the school after his death. A cosmopolitan
on principle, and a convinced disbeliever in the ethics of his day, he
comes very near to modern empiricism and especially to the modern
Hedonist school.