ARISTODEMUS (8th century B.C.), semi-legendary ruler of Messenia in the
time of the first Messenian War. Tradition relates that, after some six
years' fighting, the Messenians were forced to retire to the fortified
summit of Ithome. The Delphic oracle bade them sacrifice a virgin of the
house of Aepytus. Aristodemus offered his own daughter, and when her
lover, hoping to save her life, declared that she was no longer a
maiden, he slew her with his own hand to prove the assertion false. In
the thirteenth year of the war, Euphaes, the Messenian king, died. As he
left no children, popular election was resorted to, and Aristodemus was
chosen as his successor, though the national soothsayers objected to him
as the murderer of his daughter. As a ruler he was mild and
conciliatory. He was victorious in the pitched battle fought at the foot
of Ithome in the fifth year of his reign, a battle in which the
Messenians, reinforced by the entire Arcadian levy and picked
contingents from Argos and Sicyon, defeated the combined Spartan and
Corinthian forces. Shortly afterwards, however, led by unfavourable
omens to despair of final success, he killed himself on his daughter's
tomb. Though little is known of his life and the chronology is
uncertain, yet Aristodemus may fairly be regarded as a historical
character. His reign is dated 731-724 B.C. by Pausanias, and this may be
taken as approximately correct, though Duncker (_History of Greece_,
Eng. trans., ii. p. 69) inclines to place it eight years later.

  Pausanias iv. 9-13 is practically our only authority. He followed as
  his chief source the prose history of Myron of Priene, an
  untrustworthy writer, probably of the 2nd century B.C.; hence a good
  deal of his story must be regarded as fanciful, though we cannot
  distinguish accurately between the true and the fictitious.
       (M. N. T.)