ARITHMETIC (Gr. [Greek: arithmaetikae], sc. [Greek: technae], the art of
counting, from [Greek: arithmos], number), the art of dealing with
numerical quantities in their numerical relations.

1. Arithmetic is usually divided into _Abstract Arithmetic_ and
_Concrete Arithmetic_, the former dealing with numbers and the latter
with concrete objects. This distinction, however, might be misleading.
In stating that the sum of 11d. and 9d. is 1s. 8d. we do not mean that
nine pennies when added to eleven pennies produce a shilling and eight
pennies. The sum of money corresponding to 11d. may in fact be made up
of coins in several different ways, so that the symbol "11d." cannot be
taken as denoting any definite concrete objects. The arithmetical fact
is that 11 and 9 may be regrouped as 12 and 8, and the statement "11d. +
9d. = 1s. 8d." is only an arithmetical statement in so far as each of
the three expressions denotes a numerical quantity (§ 11).

2. The various stages in the study of arithmetic may be arranged in
different ways, and the arrangement adopted must be influenced by the
purpose in view. There are three main purposes, the practical, the
educational, and the scientific; i.e. the subject may be studied with a
view to technical skill in dealing with the arithmetical problems that
arise in actual life, or for the sake of its general influence on mental
development, or as an elementary stage in mathematical study.

3. The practical aspect is an important one. The daily activities of the
great mass of the adult population, in countries where commodities are
sold at definite prices for definite quantities, include calculations
which have often to be performed rapidly, on data orally given, and
leading in general to results which can only be approximate; and almost
every branch of manufacture or commerce has its own range of
applications of arithmetic. Arithmetic as a school subject has been
largely regarded from this point of view.

4. From the educational point of view, the value of arithmetic has
usually been regarded as consisting in the stress it lays on accuracy.
This aspect of the matter, however, belongs mainly to the period when
arithmetic was studied almost entirely for commercial purposes; and even
then accuracy was not found always to harmonize with actuality. The
development of physical science has tended to emphasize an exactly
opposite aspect, viz. the impossibility, outside a certain limited range
of subjects, of ever obtaining absolute accuracy, and the consequent
importance of not wasting time in attempting to obtain results beyond a
certain degree of approximation.

5. As a branch of mathematics, arithmetic may be treated logically,
psychologically, or historically. All these aspects are of importance to
the teacher: the logical, in order that he may know the end which he
seeks to attain; the psychological, that he may know how best to attain
this end; and the historical, for the light that history throws on
psychology,

The logical arrangement of the subject is not the best for elementary
study. The division into abstract and concrete, for instance, is
logical, if the former is taken as relating to number and the latter to
numerical quantity (§ 11). But the result of a rigid application of this
principle would be that the calculation of the cost of 3 lb. of tea at
2s. a lb. would be deferred until after the study of logarithms. The
psychological treatment recognizes the fact that the concrete precedes
the abstract and that the abstract is based on the concrete; and it also
recognizes the futility of attempting a strictly continuous development
of the subject.

On the other hand, logical analysis is necessary if the subject is to be
understood. As an illustration, we may take the elementary processes of
addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. These are still
called in text-books the "four simple rules"; but this name ignores
certain essential differences. (i) If we consider that we are dealing
with numerical quantities, we must recognize the fact that, while
addition and subtraction might in the first instance be limited to such
quantities, multiplication and division necessarily introduce the idea
of pure number. (ii) If on the other hand we regard ourselves as dealing
with pure number throughout, then, as multiplication is continued
addition, we ought to include in our classification involution as
continued multiplication. Or we might say that, since multiplication is
a form of addition, and division a form of subtraction, there are really
only two fundamental processes, viz. addition and subtraction. (iii) The
inclusion of the four processes under one general head fails to indicate
the essential difference between addition and multiplication, as direct
processes, on the one hand, and subtraction and division, as inverse
processes, on the other (§ 59).

6. The present article deals mainly with the principles of the subject,
for which a logical arrangement is on the whole the more convenient. It
is not suggested that this is the proper order to be adopted by the
teacher.

I. NUMBER

7. _Ordinal and Cardinal Numbers._--One of the primary distinctions in
the use of number is between ordinal and cardinal numbers, or rather
between the ordinal and the cardinal aspects of number. The usual
statement is that _one, two, three_, ... are cardinal numbers, and
_first, second, third_, ... are ordinal numbers. This, however, is an
incomplete statement; the words one, two, three, ... and the
corresponding symbols 1, 2, 3, ... or I, II, III, ... are used sometimes
as ordinals, i.e. to denote the place of an individual in a series, and
sometimes as cardinals, i.e. to denote the total number since the
commencement of the series.

On the whole, the ordinal use is perhaps the more common. Thus "100" on
a page of a book does not mean that the page is 100 times the page
numbered 1, but merely that it is the page after 99. Even in commercial
transactions, in dealing with sums of money, the statement of an amount
often has reference to the last item added rather than to a total; and
geometrical measurements are practically ordinal (§ 26).

For ordinal purposes we use, as symbols, not only figures, such as 1, 2,
3, ... but also letters, as a, b, c, ... Thus the pages of a book may be
numbered 1, 2, 3, ... and the chapters I, II, III, ... but the sheets
are lettered A, B, C, ... Figures and letters may even be used in
combination; thus 16 may be followed by 16a and 16b, and these by 17,
and in such a case the ordinal 100 does not correspond with the total
(cardinal) number up to this point.

Arithmetic is supposed to deal with cardinal, not with ordinal numbers;
but it will be found that actual numeration, beyond about three or four,
is based on the ordinal aspect of number, and that a scientific
treatment of the subject usually requires a return to this fundamental
basis.

One difference between the treatment of ordinal and of cardinal numbers
may be noted. Where a number is expressed in terms of various
denominations, a cardinal number usually begins with the largest
denomination, and an ordinal number with the smallest. Thus we speak of
one thousand eight hundred and seventy-six, and represent it by
MDCCCLXXVI or 1876; but we should speak of the third day of August 1876,
and represent it by 3. 8. 1876. It might appear as if the writing of
1876 was an exception to this rule; but in reality 1876, when used in
this way, is partly cardinal and partly ordinal, the first three figures
being cardinal and the last ordinal. To make the year completely
ordinal, we should have to describe it as the 6th year of the 8th decade
of the 8th century of the 2nd millennium; i.e. we should represent the
date by 3. 8. 6. 8. 9. 2, the total number of years, months and days
completed being 1875. 7. 2.

In using an ordinal we direct our attention to a term of a series, while
in using a cardinal we direct our attention to the interval between two
terms. The total number in the series is the sum of the two cardinal
numbers obtained by counting up to any interval from the beginning and
from the end respectively; but if we take the ordinal numbers from the
beginning and from the end we count one term twice over. Hence, if there
are 365 days in a year, the 100th day from the beginning is the 266th,
not the 265th, from the end.

8. _Meaning of Names of Numbers._--What do we mean by any particular
number, e.g. by _seven_, or by _two hundred and fifty-three_? We can
define _two_ as _one and one_, and _three_ as _one and one and one_; but
we obviously cannot continue this method for ever. For the definition of
large numbers we may employ either of two methods, which will be called
the _grouping_ method and the _counting_ method.

(i) _Method of Grouping._--The first method consists in defining the
first few numbers, and forming larger numbers by groups or aggregates,
formed partly by multiplication and partly by addition. Thus, on the
denary system (§ 16) we can give independent definitions to the numbers
up to ten, and then regard (e.g.) fifty-three as a composite number made
up of five tens and three ones. Or, on the quinary-binary system, we
need only give independent definitions to the numbers up to five; the
numbers _six, seven_, ... can then be regarded as _five and one, five
and two_, ..., a fresh series being started when we get to _five and
five_ or _ten._ The grouping method introduces multiplication into the
definition of large numbers; but this, from the teacher's point of view,
is not now such a serious objection as it was in the days when children
were introduced to millions and billions before they had any idea of
elementary arithmetical processes.

(ii) _Method of Counting._--The second method consists in taking a
series of names or symbols for the first few numbers, and then repeating
these according to a regular system for successive numbers, so that each
number is defined by reference to the number immediately preceding it in
the series. Thus _two_ still means _one and one_, but _three_ means _two
and one_, not _one and one and one._ Similarly _two hundred and
fifty-three_ does not mean two hundreds, five tens and three ones, but
_one_ more than _two hundred and fifty-two_; and the number which is
called one hundred is not defined as ten tens, but as one more than
ninety-nine.

9. _Concrete and Abstract Numbers._--Number is concrete or abstract
according as it does or does not relate to particular objects. On the
whole, the grouping method refers mainly to concrete numbers and the
counting method to abstract numbers. If we sort objects into groups of
ten, and find that there are five groups of ten with three over, we
regard the five and the three as names for the actual sets of groups or
of individuals. The three, for instance, are regarded as a whole when we
name them _three._ If, however, we count these three as one, two, three,
then the number of times we count is an abstract number. Thus number in
the abstract is the number of times that the act of counting is
performed in any particular case. This, however, is a description, not a
definition, and we still want a definition for "number" in the phrase
"number of times."

10. _Definition of "Number."_--Suppose we fix on a certain sequence of
names "one," "two," "three," ..., or symbols such as 1, 2, 3, ...; this
sequence being always the same. If we take a set of concrete objects,
and name them in succession "one," "two," "three," ..., naming each once
and once only, we shall not get beyond a certain name, e.g. "six." Then,
in saying that the number of objects is six, what we mean is that the
name of the last object named is six. We therefore only require a
definite law for the formation of the successive names or symbols. The
symbols 1, 2, ... 9, 10, ..., for instance, are formed according to a
definite law; and in giving 253 as the _number_ of a set of objects we
mean that if we attach to them the symbols 1, 2, 3, ... in succession,
according to this law, the symbol attached to the last object will be
253. If we say that this act of attaching a symbol has been performed
253 times, then 253 is an _abstract_ (or _pure_) _number._

Underlying this definition is a certain assumption, viz. that if we take
the objects in a different order, the last symbol attached will still be
253. This, in an elementary treatment of the subject, must be regarded
as axiomatic; but it is really a simple case of mathematical induction.
(See ALGEBRA.) If we take two objects A and B, it is obvious that
whether we take them as A, B, or as B, A, we shall in each case get the
sequence 1, 2. Suppose this were true for, say, eight objects, marked 1
to 8. Then, if we introduce another object anywhere in the series, all
those coming after it will be displaced so that each will have the mark
formerly attached to the next following; and the last will therefore be
9 instead of 8. This is true, whatever the arrangement of the original
objects may be, and wherever the new one is introduced; and therefore,
if the theorem is true for 8, it is true for 9. But it is true for 2;
therefore it is true for 3; therefore for 4, and so on.

11. _Numerical Quantities._--If the term _number_ is confined to number
in the abstract, then number in the concrete may be described as
_numerical quantity_. Thus £3 denotes £1 taken 3 times. The £1 is termed
the _unit._ A numerical quantity, therefore, represents a certain unit,
taken a certain number of times. If we take £3 twice, we get £6; and if
we take 3s. twice, we get 6s., i.e. 6 times 1s. Thus arithmetical
processes deal with numerical quantities by dealing with numbers,
provided the unit is the same throughout. If we retain the unit, the
arithmetic is concrete; if we ignore it, the arithmetic is abstract. But
in the latter case it must always be understood that there is some unit
concerned, and the results have no meaning until the unit is
reintroduced.

II. NOTATION, NUMERATION AND NUMBER-IDEATION

12. _Terms used._--The representation of numbers by spoken sounds is
called _numeration_; their representation by written signs is called
_notation_. The systems adopted for numeration and for notation do not
always agree with one another; nor do they always correspond with the
idea which the numbers subjectively present. This latter presentation
may, in the absence of any accepted term, be called _number-ideation_;
this word covering not only the perception or recognition of particular
numbers, but also the formation of a number-concept.

13. _Notation of Numbers._--The system which is now almost universally
in use amongst civilized nations for representing cardinal numbers is
the Hindu, sometimes incorrectly called the Arabic, system. The
essential features which distinguish this from other systems are (1) the
limitation of the number of different symbols, only ten being used,
however large the number to be represented may be; (2) the use of the
_zero_ to indicate the absence of number; and (3) the principle of local
value, by which a symbol in effect represents different numbers,
according to its position. The symbols denoting a number are called its
_digits_.

A brief account of the development of the system will be found under
NUMERAL. Here we are concerned with the principle, the explanation of
which is different according as we proceed on the grouping or the
counting system.

(i) On the grouping system we may in the first instance consider that we
have separate symbols for numbers from "one" to "nine," but that when we
reach ten objects we put them in a group and denote this group by the
symbol used for "one," but printed in a different type or written of a
different size or (in teaching) of a different colour. Similarly when we
get to ten tens we denote them by a new representation of the figure
denoting one. Thus we may have:

      ones    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
      tens    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
  hundreds,\  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
     &c.   /         &c.         &c.

On this principle 24 would represent twenty-four, 24 two hundred and
forty, and 24 two hundred and four. To prevent confusion the _zero_ or
"nought" is introduced, so that the successive figures, beginning from
the right, may represent ones, tens, hundreds, ... We then have, e.g.,
240 to denote two hundreds and four tens; and we may now adopt a uniform
type for all the figures, writing this 240.

  1  2  3 .. .. .. .. 8  9  10  1  2  3 .. .. .. ..
  o  o  o .. .. .. .. o  o  o   o  o  o .. .. .. ..

(ii) On the counting system we may consider that we have a series of
objects (represented in the adjoining diagram by dots), and that we
attach to these objects in succession the symbols 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 0, repeating this series indefinitely. There is as yet no
distinction between the first object marked 1 and the second object
marked 1. We can, however, attach to the 0's the same symbols, 1, 2, ...
0 in succession, in a separate column, repeating the series
indefinitely; then do the same with every 0 of this new series; and so
on. Any particular object is then defined completely by the combination
of the symbols last written down in each series; and this combination of
symbols can equally be used to denote the number of objects up to and
including the last one (§ 10).

In writing down a number in excess of 1000 it is (except where the
number represents a particular year) usual in England and America to
group the figures in sets of three, starting from the right, and to mark
off the sets by commas. On the continent of Europe the figures are taken
in sets of three, but are merely spaced, the comma being used at the end
of a number to denote the commencement of a decimal.

The zero, called "nought," is of course a different thing from the
letter O of the alphabet, but there may be a historical connexion
between them (§ 79). It is perhaps interesting to note that the
latter-day telephone operator calls 1907 "nineteen O seven" instead of
"nineteen nought seven."

14. _Direction of the Number-Series._--There is no settled convention as
to the direction in which the series of symbols denoting the successive
numbers one, two, three, ... is to be written.

(i) If the numbers were written down in succession, they would naturally
proceed from left to right, thus:--1, 2, 3,... This system, however,
would require that in passing to "double figures" the figure denoting
tens should be written either above or below the figure denoting ones,
e.g.

                   1
  1, 2, ..., 8, 9, 0, 1, 2, ... or 1, 2, ..., 8, 9, 0, 1, 2, ...
                                                    1

The placing of the tens-figure to the left of the ones-figure will not
seem natural unless the number-series runs either up or down.

(ii) In writing down any particular number, the successive powers of ten
are written from right to left, e.g. 5,462,198 is

  (6)   (5)   (4)   (3)   (2)   (1)   (0)
   5     4     6     2     1     9     8

the small figures in brackets indicating the successive powers. On the
other hand, in writing decimals, the sequence (of negative powers) is
from left to right.

(iii) In making out lists, schedules, mathematical tables (e.g. a
multiplication-table), statistical tables, &c., the numbers are written
vertically downwards. In the case of lists and schedules the numbers are
only ordinals; but in the case of mathematical or statistical tables
they are usually regarded as cardinals, though, when they represent
values of a continuous quantity, they must be regarded as ordinals (§§
26, 93).

(iv) In graphic representation measurements are usually made upwards;
the adoption of this direction resting on certain deeply rooted ideas (§
23).

  200
   50
    3
  ---
  253
  ===

This question of direction is of importance in reference to the
development of useful number-forms (§ 23); and the existence of the two
methods mentioned under (iii) and (iv) above produces confusion in
comparing numerical tabulation with graphical representation. It is
generally accepted that the horizontal direction of increase, where a
horizontal direction is necessary, should be from left to right; but
uniformity as regards vertical direction could only be attained either
by printing mathematical tables upwards or by taking "downwards,"
instead of "upwards," as the "positive" direction for graphical
purposes. The downwards direction will be taken in this article as the
normal one for succession of numbers (e.g. in multiplication), and,
where the arrangement is horizontal, it is to be understood that this is
for convenience of printing. It should be noticed that, in writing the
components of a number 253 as 200, 50 and 3, each component beneath the
next larger one, we are really adopting the downwards principle, since
the figures which make up 253 will on this principle be successively 2,
5 and 3 (§ 13 (ii)).

15. _Roman Numerals._--Although the Roman numerals are no longer in use
for representing cardinal numbers, except in certain special cases (e.g.
clock-faces, milestones and chemists' prescriptions), they are still
used for ordinals.

The system differs completely from the Hindu system. There are no single
symbols for two, three, &c.; but numbers are represented by combinations
of symbols for one, five, ten, fifty, one hundred, five hundred, &c.,
the numbers which have single symbols, viz. I, V, X, L, C, D, M,
proceeding by multiples of five and two alternately. Thus 1878 is
MDCCCLXXVIII, i.e. thousand five-hundred hundred hundred hundred fifty
ten ten five one one one.

The system is therefore essentially a cardinal and grouping one, i.e. it
represents a number as the sum of sets of other numbers. It is therefore
remarkable that it should now only be used for ordinal purposes, while
the Hindu system, which is ordinal in its nature, since a single series
is constantly repeated, is used almost exclusively for cardinal numbers.
This fact seems to illustrate the truth that the counting principle is
the fundamental one, to which the interpretation of grouped numbers must
ultimately be referred.

The normal process of writing the larger numbers on the left is in
certain cases modified in the Roman system by writing a number in front
of a larger one to denote subtraction. Thus _four_, originally written
IIII, was later written IV. This may have been due to one or both of two
causes; a primitive tendency to refer numbers, in numeration, to the
nearest large number (§ 24 (iv)), and the difficulty of perceiving the
number of a group of objects beyond about three (§ 22). Similarly IX, XL
and XC were written for nine, forty and ninety respectively. These,
however, were later developments.

16. _Scales of Notation._--In the Hindu system the numbering proceeds by
tens, tens of tens, &c.; thus the figure in the fifth place, counting
from the right, denotes the product of the corresponding number by four
tens in succession. The notation is then said to be in the _scale_ of
which ten is the _base_, or in the _denary scale._ The Roman system,
except for the use of symbols for five, fifty, &c., is also in the
denary scale, though expressed in a different way. The introduction of
these other symbols produces a compound scale, which may be called a
_quinary-binary_, or, less correctly, a _quinary-denary_ scale.

The figures used in the Hindu notation might be used to express numbers
in any other scale than the denary, provided new symbols were introduced
if the base of the scale exceeded ten. Thus 1878 in the quinary-binary
scale would be 1131213, and 1828 would be 1130213; the meaning of these
is seen at once by comparison with MDCCCLXXVIII and MDCCCXXVIII.
Similarly the number which in the denary scale is 215 would in the
quaternary scale (base 4) be 3113, being equal to 3·4·4·4 + 1·4·4 + 1·4
+ 3.

The use of the denary scale in notation is due to its use in numeration
(§ 18); this again being due (as exemplified by the use of the word
_digit_) to the primitive use of the fingers for counting. If mankind
had had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot, we should be
using a _duodenary scale_ (base twelve), which would have been far more
convenient.

17. _Notation of Numerical Quantities._--Over a large part of the
civilized world the introduction of the metric system (§ 118) has caused
the notation of all numerical quantities to be in the denary scale. In
Great Britain and her colonies, however, and in the United States, other
systems of notation still survive, though there is none which is
consistently in one scale, other than the denary. The method is to form
quantities into groups, and these again into larger groups; but the
number of groups making one of the next largest groups varies as we
proceed along the scale. The successive groups or units thus formed are
called _denominations._ Thus twelve pennies make a shilling, and twenty
shillings a pound, while the penny is itself divided into four farthings
(or two halfpennies). There are, therefore, four denominations, the
bases for conversion of one denomination into the next being
successively four (or two), twelve and twenty. Within each denomination,
however, the denary notation is employed exclusively, e.g. "twelve
shillings" is denoted by 12s.

The diversity of scales appears to be due mainly to four causes: (i) the
tendency to group into scores (§ 20); (ii) the tendency to subdivide
into twelve; (in) the tendency to subdivide into two or four, with
repetitions, making subdivision into sixteen or sixty-four; and (iv) the
independent adoption of different units for measuring the same kind of
magnitude.

Where there is a division into sixteen parts, a binary scale may be
formed by dividing into groups of two, four or eight. Thus the weights
ordinarily in use for measuring from ¼ oz. up to 2 lb. give the basis
for a binary scale up to not more than eight figures, only 0 and 1 being
used. The points of the compass might similarly be expressed by numbers
in a binary scale; but the numbers would be ordinal, and the expressions
would be analogous to those of decimals rather than to those of whole
numbers.

In order to apply arithmetical processes to a quantity expressed in two
or more denominations, we must first express it in terms of a single
denomination by means of a varying scale of notation. Thus £254, 13S.
6d. may be written

       (20)    (12)
  £254  "  13s. "  6d.;

each of the numbers in brackets indicating the number of units in one
denomination that go to form a unit in the next higher denomination. To
express the quantity in terms of £, it ought to be written

       (20)    (12)
  £254  "   13  "  6;

this would mean £254 13(6/12)/20 or £(254 + 13/20 + 6/(20·12)), and
therefore would involve a fractional number.

A quantity expressed in two or more denominations is usually called a
_compound number_ or _compound quantity_. The former term is obviously
incorrect, since a quantity is not a number; and the latter is not very
suggestive. For agreement with the terminology of fractional numbers (§
62) we shall describe such a quantity as a _mixed quantity_. The letters
or symbols descriptive of each denomination are visually placed after or
(in actual calculations) above the figures denoting the numbers of the
corresponding units; but in a few cases, e.g. in the case of £, the
symbol is placed before the figures. There would be great convenience in
a general adoption of this latter method; the combination of the two
methods in such an expression as £123, 16s. 4½d. is especially awkward.

18. _Numeration._--The names of numbers are almost wholly based on the
denary scale; thus eighteen means eight and ten, and twenty-four means
twice ten and four. The words _eleven_ and _twelve_ have been supposed
to suggest etymologically a denary basis (see, however, NUMERAL).

Two exceptions, however, may be noted.

(i) The use of _dozen, gross_ (= dozen dozen), and _great gross_ (=
dozen gross) indicates an attempt at a duodenary basis. But the system
has never spread; and the word "dozen" itself is based on the denary
scale.

(ii) The _score_ (twenty) has been used as a basis, but to an even more
limited extent. There is no essential difference, however, between this
and the denary basis. As the latter is due to finger-reckoning, so the
use of the fingers and the toes produced a vigesimal scale. Examples of
this are given in § 20; it is worthy of notice that the vigesimal (or,
rather, quinary-quaternary) system was used by the Mayas of Yucatan, and
also, in a more perfect form, by the Nahuatl (Aztecs) of Mexico.

The number ten having been taken as the basis of numeration, there are
various methods that might consistently be adopted for naming large
numbers.

(i) We might merely name the figures contained in the number. This
method is often adopted in practical life, even as regards mixed
quantities; thus £57,593, 16s. 4d. would be read as _five seven, five
nine three, sixteen and four pence._

(ii) The word _ten_ might be introduced, e.g. 593 would be _five ten ten
ninety_ (= nine ten) _and three._

(iii) Names might be given to the successive powers of ten, up to the
point to which numeration of ones is likely to go. Partial applications
of this method are found in many languages.

(iv) A compromise between the last two methods would be to have names
for the series of numbers, beginning with ten, each of which is the
"square" of the preceding one. This would in effect be analysing numbers
into components of the form a. 10^b where a is less than 10, and the
index b is expressed in the binary scale, e.g. 7,000,000 would be
7 · 10^4 · 10², and 700,000 would be 7 · 10^4 · 10^1.

The British method is a mixture of the last two, but with an index-scale
which is partly ternary and partly binary. There are separate names for
ten, ten times ten (= _hundred_), and ten times ten times ten
(= _thousand_); but the next single name is _million_, representing a
thousand times a thousand. The next name is _billion_, which in Great
Britain properly means a million million, and in the United States (as
in France) a thousand million.

19. _Discrepancies between Numeration and Notation._--Although
numeration and notation are both ostensibly on the denary system, they
are not always exactly parallel. The following are a few of the
discrepancies.

(i) A set of written symbols is sometimes read in more than one way,
while on the other hand two different sets of symbols (at any rate if
denoting numerical quantities) may be read in the same way. Thus 1820
might be read as _one thousand eight hundred and twenty_ if it
represented a number of men, but it would be read as _eighteen hundred
and twenty_ if it represented a year of the Christian era; while 1s. 6d.
and 18d. might both be read as _eighteenpence_. As regards the first of
these two examples, however, it would be more correct to write 1,820 for
the former of the two meanings (cf. § 13).

(ii) The symbols 11 and 12 are read as _eleven_ and _twelve_, not
(except in elementary teaching) as _ten-one_ and _ten-two_.

(iii) The names of the numbers next following these, up to 19 inclusive,
only faintly suggest a _ten_. This difficulty is not always recognized
by teachers, who forget that they themselves had to be told that
_eighteen_ means _eight-and-ten_.

(iv) Even beyond twenty, up to a hundred, the word _ten_ is not used in
numeration, e.g. we say _thirty-four_, not _three ten four_.

(v) The rule that the greater number comes first is not universally
observed in numeration. It is not observed, for instance, in the names
of numbers from 13 to 19; nor was it in the names from which _eleven_
and _twelve_ are derived. Beyond twenty it is usually, but not always,
observed; we sometimes instead of _twenty-four_ say _four and twenty_.
(This latter is the universal system in German, up to 100, and for any
portion of 100 in numbers beyond 100.)

20. _Other Methods of Numeration and Notation._--It is only possible
here to make a brief mention of systems other than those now ordinarily
in use.

(i) _Vigesimal Scale._--The system of counting by twenties instead of by
tens has existed in many countries; and, though there is no
corresponding notation, it still exhibits itself in the names of
numbers. This is the case, for instance, in the Celtic languages; and
the Breton or Gaulish names have affected the Latin system, so that the
French names for some numbers are on the vigesimal system. This system
also appears in the Danish numerals. In English the use of the word
_score_ to represent twenty--e.g. in "threescore and ten" for
seventy--is superimposed on the denary system, and has never formed an
essential part of the language. The word, like _dozen_ and _couple_, is
still in use, but rather in a vague than in a precise sense.

(ii) _Roman System._--The Roman notation has been explained above (§
15). Though convenient for exhibiting the composition of any particular
number, it was inconvenient for purposes of calculation; and in fact
calculation was entirely (or almost entirely) performed by means of the
abacus (q.v.). The numeration was in the denary scale, so that it did
not agree absolutely with the notation. The principle of subtraction
from a higher number, which appeared in notation, also appeared in
numeration, but not for exactly the same numbers or in exactly the same
way; thus XVIII was two-from-twenty, and the next number was
one-from-twenty, but it was written XIX, not IXX.

(iii) _Other Systems of Antiquity._--The Egyptian notation was purely
denary, the only separate signs being those for 1, 10, 100, &c. The
ordinary notation of the Babylonians was denary, but they also used a
sexagesimal scale, i.e. a scale whose base was 60. The Hebrews had a
notation containing separate signs (the letters of the alphabet) for
numbers from 1 to 10, then for multiples of 10 up to 100, and then for
multiples of 100 up to 400, and later up to 1000.

The earliest Greek system of notation was similar to the Roman, except
that the symbols for 50, 500, &c., were more complicated. Later, a
system similar to the Hebrew was adopted, and extended by reproducing
the first nine symbols of the series, preceded by accents, to denote
multiplication by 1000.

On the island of Ceylon there still exists, or existed till recently, a
system which combines some of the characteristics of the later Greek (or
Semitic) and the modern European notation; and it is conjectured that
this was the original Hindu system.

  For a further account of the above systems see NUMERAL, and the
  authorities quoted at the end of the present article.

21. _The Number-Concept._--It is probable that very few people have any
definite mental presentation of individual numbers (i.e. numbers
proceeding by differences of _one_) beyond 100, or at any rate beyond
144. Larger numbers are grasped by forming numbers into groups or by
treating some large number as a unit. A person would appreciate the
difference between 93,000,000 m. and 94,000,000 m. as the distance of
the centre of the sun from the centre of the earth at a particular
moment; but he certainly would not appreciate the relative difference
between 93,000,000 m. and 93,000,001 m. In order to get an idea of
93,000,000, he must take a million as his unit. Similarly, in the metric
system he cannot mentally compare two units, one of which is 1000 times
the other. The metre and the kilometre, for instance, or the metre and
the millimetre, are not directly comparable; but the metre can be
conceived as containing 100 centimetres.

On the other hand, it would seem that, for most educated people, sixteen
and seventeen or twenty-six and twenty-seven, and even eighty-six and
eighty-seven, are single numbers, just as six and seven are, and are not
made up of groups of tens and ones. In other words, the denary scale,
though adopted in notation and in numeration, does not arise in the
corresponding mental concept until we get beyond 100.

Again, in the use of decimals, it is unusual to give less than two
figures. Thus 3.142 or 3.14 would be quite intelligible; but 3.1 does
not convey such a good idea to most people as either 3(1/10) or 3.10,
i.e. as an expression denoting a fraction or a percentage.

There appears therefore to be a tendency to use some larger number than
ten as a basis for grouping into new units or for subdivision into
parts. The Babylonians adopted 60 for both these purposes, thus giving
us the sexagesimal division of angles and of time.

This view is supported, not only by the intelligibility of percentages
to ordinary persons, but also by the tendency, noted above (§ 19), to
group years into centuries, and to avoid the use of thousands. Thus 1876
is not 1 thousand, 8 hundred, 7 tens and 6, but 18 hundred and 76, each
of the numbers 18 and 76 being named as if it were a single number. It
is also in accordance with what is so far known about number-forms (§
23).

If there is this tendency to adopt 100 as a basis instead of 10, the
teaching of decimals might sometimes be simplified by proceeding from
percentages to percentages of percentages, i.e. by commencing with
_centesimals_ instead of with _decimals._

22. _Perception of Number._--In using material objects as a basis for
developing the number-concept, it must be remembered that it is only
when there are a few objects that their number can be perceived without
either counting or the performance of some arithmetical process such as
addition. If four coins are laid on a table, close together, they can
(by most adults) be seen to be four, without counting; but seven coins
have to be separated mentally into two groups, the numbers of which are
added, or one group has to be seen and the remaining objects counted,
before the number is known to be seven.

The actual limit of the number that can be "seen"--i.e. seen without
counting or adding--depends for any individual on the shape and
arrangement of the objects, but under similar conditions it is not the
same for all individuals. It has been suggested that as many as six
objects can be seen at once; but this is probably only the case with few
people, and with them only when the objects have a certain geometrical
arrangement. The limit for most adults, under favourable conditions, is
about four. Under certain conditions it is less; thus IIII, the old
Roman notation for _four_, is difficult to distinguish from III, and
this may have been the main reason for replacing it by IV (§ 15).

In the case of young children the limit is probably two. That this was
also the limit in the case of primitive races, and that the
classification of things was into one, two and many, before any definite
process of counting (e.g. by the fingers) came to be adopted, is clear
from the use of the "dual number" in language, and from the way in which
the names for three and four are often based on those for one and two.
With the individual, as with the race, the limit of the number that can
be seen gradually increases up to four or five.

The statement that a number of objects can be seen to be three or four
is not to be taken as implying that there is a simultaneous perception
of all the objects. The attention may be directed in succession to the
different objects, so that the perception is rhythmical; the distinctive
rhythm thus aiding the perception of the particular number.

In consequence of this limitation of the power of perception of number,
it is practically impossible to use a pure denary scale in elementary
number-teaching. If a quinary-binary system (such as would naturally fit
in with counting on the fingers) is not adopted, teachers unconsciously
resort to a binary-quinary system. This is commonly done where cubes are
used; thus seven is represented by three pairs of cubes, with a single
cube at the top.

23. _Visualization of the Series._--A striking fact, in reference to
ideas of number, is the existence of number-forms, i.e. of definite
arrangements, on an imagined plane or in space, of the mental
representations of the successive numbers from 1 onwards. The proportion
of persons in whom number-forms exist has been variously estimated; but
there is reason to believe that the forms arise at a very early stage of
childhood, and that they did at some time exist in many individuals who
have afterwards forgotten them. Those persons who possess them are also
apt to make spatial arrangements of days of the week or the month,
months of the year, the letters of the alphabet, &c.; and it is
practically certain that only children would make such arrangements of
letters of the alphabet. The forms seem to result from a general
tendency to visualization as an aid to memory; the letter-forms may in
the first instance be quite as frequent as the number-forms, but they
vanish in early childhood, being of no practical value, while the
number-forms continue as an aid to arithmetical work.

The forms are varied, and have few points in common; but the following
tendencies are indicated.

(i) In the majority of cases the numbers lie on a continuous (but
possibly zigzag) line.

(ii) There is nearly always (at any rate in English cases) a break in
direction at 12. From 1 to 12 the numbers sometimes lie in the
circumference of a circle, an arrangement obviously suggested by a
clock-face; in these cases the series usually mounts upwards from 12. In
a large number of cases, however, the direction is steadily upwards from
1 to 12, then changing. In some cases the initial direction is from
right to left or from left to right; but there are very few in which it
is downwards.

(iii) The multiples of 10 are usually strongly marked; but special
stress is also laid on other important numbers, e.g. the multiples of
12.

(iv) The series sometimes goes up to very high numbers, but sometimes
stops at 100, or even earlier. It is not stated, in most cases, whether
all the numbers within the limits of the series have definite positions,
or whether there are only certain numbers which form an essential part
of the figure, while others only exist potentially. Probably the latter
is almost universally the case.

These forms are developed spontaneously, without suggestion from
outside. The possibility of replacing them by a standard form, which
could be utilized for performing arithmetical operations, is worthy of
consideration; some of the difficulties in the way of standardization
have already been indicated (§ 14). The general tendency to prefer an
upward direction is important; and our current phraseology suggests that
this is the direction which increase is naturally regarded as taking.
Thus we speak of counting _up_ to a certain number; and similarly
mathematicians speak of _high_ and _ascending_ powers, while engineers
speak of high pressure, high speed, high power, &c. This tendency is
probably aided by the use of bricks or cubes in elementary
number-teaching.

24. _Primitive Ideas of Number._--The names of numbers give an idea of
the way in which the idea of number has developed. Where civilization is
at all advanced, there are usually certain names, the origin of which
cannot be traced; but, as we go farther back, these become fewer, and
the names are found to be composed on certain systems. The systems are
varied, and it is impossible to lay down any absolute laws, but the
following seem to be the main conclusions.

(i) Amongst some of the lowest tribes, as (with a few exceptions)
amongst animals, the only differentiation is between one and many, or
between one, two and many, or between one, two, three and many. As it
becomes necessary to use higher but still small numbers, they are formed
by combinations of one and two, or perhaps of three with one or two.
Thus many of the Australasian and South American tribes use only one and
two; seven, for instance, would be two two two one.

(ii) Beyond ten, and in many cases beyond five, the names have reference
to the use of the fingers, and sometimes of the toes, for counting; and
the scale may be quinary, denary or vigesimal, according as one hand,
the pair of hands, or the hands and feet, are taken as the new unit.
_Five_ may be signified by the word for hand; and either _ten_ or
_twenty_ by the word for _man_. Or the words signifying these numbers
may have reference to the completion of some act of counting. Between
five and ten; or beyond ten, the names may be due to combinations, e.g.
16 may be 10 + 5 + 1; or they may be the actual names of the fingers
last counted.

(iii) There are a few, but only a few, cases in which the number 6 or 8
is named as twice 3 or twice 4; and there are also a few cases in which
7, 8 and 9 are named as 6 + 1, 6 + 2 and 6 + 3. In the large majority of
cases the numbers 6, 7, 8 and 9 are 5 + 1, 5 + 2, 5 + 3 and 5 + 4, being
named either directly from their composition in this way or as the
fingers on the second hand.

(iv) There is a certain tendency to name 4, 9, 14 and 19 as being one
short of 5, 10, 15 and 20 respectively; the principle being thus the
same as that of the Roman IV, IX, &c. It is possible that at an early
stage the number of the fingers on one hand or on the two hands together
was only thought of vaguely as a large number in comparison with 2 or 3,
and that the number did not attain definiteness until it was linked up
with the smaller by insertion of the intermediate ones; and the linking
up might take place in both directions.

(v) In a few cases the names of certain small numbers are the names of
objects which present these numbers in some conspicuous way. Thus the
word used by the Abipones to denote 5 was the name of a certain hide of
five colours. It has been suggested that names of this kind may have
been the origin of the numeral words of different races; but it is
improbable that direct visual perception would lead to a name for a
number unless a name based on a process of counting had previously been
given to it.

25. _Growth of the Number-Concept._--The general principle that the
development of the individual follows the development of the race holds
good to a certain extent in the case of the number-concept, but it is
modified by the existence of language dealing with concepts which are
beyond the reach of the child, and also, of course, by the direct
attempts at instruction. One result is the formation of a number-series
as a mere succession of names without any corresponding ideas of number;
the series not being necessarily correct.

When numbering begins, the names of the successive numbers are attached
to the individual objects; thus the numbers are originally ordinal, not
cardinal.

The conception of number as cardinal, i.e. as something belonging to a
group of objects as a whole, is a comparatively late one, and does not
arise until the idea of a whole consisting of its parts has been formed.
This is the _quantitative_ aspect of number.

The development from the name-series to the quantitative conception is
aided by the numbering of material objects and the performance of
elementary processes of comparison, addition, &c., with them. It may
also be aided, to a certain extent, by the tendency to find rhythms in
sequences of sounds. This tendency is common in adults as well as in
children; the strokes of a clock may, for instance, be grouped into
fours, and thus eleven is represented as two fours and three.
Finger-counting is of course natural to children, and leads to grouping
into fives, and ultimately to an understanding of the denary system of
notation.

  1    2    3
  o    o    o  ...

     FIG. 1.

  1       2      3            1       2      3
  o       o       o ...       o   I   o   II   o   III ...
  I                           \___/      /         /
   \____/                     \_________/         /
     II                       \__________________/
  \_____________/
        III

      FIG. 2.                         FIG. 3.

26. _Representation of Geometrical Magnitude by Number._--The
application of arithmetical methods to geometrical measurement presents
some difficulty. In reality there is a transition from a cardinal to an
ordinal system, but to an ordinal system which does not agree with the
original ordinal system from which the cardinal system was derived. To
see this, we may represent ordinal numbers by the ordinary numerals 1,
2, 3, ... and cardinal numbers by the Roman I, II, III, ... Then in the
earliest stage each object counted is indivisible; either we are
counting it as a whole, or we are not counting it at all. The symbols 1,
2, 3, ... then refer to the individual objects, as in fig. 1; this is
the primary ordinal stage. Figs. 2 and 3 represent the cardinal stage;
fig. 2 showing how the I, II, III, ... denote the successively larger
groups of objects, while fig. 3 shows how the name II of the whole is
determined by the name 2 of the last one counted.

When now we pass to geometrical measurement, each "one" is a thing which
is itself divisible, and it cannot be said that at any moment we are
counting it; it is only when one is completed that we can count it. The
names 1, 2, 3, ... for the individual objects cease to have an
intelligible meaning, and measurement is effected by the cardinal
numbers I, II, III, ..., as in fig. 4. These cardinal numbers have now,
however, come to denote individual points in the line of measurement,
i.e. the points of separation of the individual units of length. The
point III in fig. 4 does not include the point II in the same way that
the number III includes the number II in fig. 2, and the points must
therefore be denoted by the ordinal numbers 1, 2, 3, ... as in fig. 5,
the zero 0 falling into its natural place immediately before the
commencement of the first unit.

     1       2        3                _____   _____   _____
   _____   _____    _____      ...    0      1       2       3 ...
         I       II       III
   \____/        /         /                   FIG. 5
   \____________/         /
   \_____________________/

           FIG. 4

Thus, while arithmetical numbering refers to units, geometrical
numbering does not refer to units but to the intervals between units.

III. ARITHMETIC OF INTEGRAL NUMBERS

(i.) _Preliminary_

27. _Equality and Identity._--There is a certain difference between the
use of words referring to equality and identity in arithmetic and in
algebra respectively; what is an _equality_ in the former becoming an
_identity_ in the latter. Thus the statement that 4 times 3 is equal to
3 times 4, or, in abbreviated form, 4 × 3 = 3 × 4 (§ 28), is a statement
not of identity but of equality; i.e. 4 × 3 and 3 × 4 mean different
things, but the operations which they denote produce the same result.
But in algebra a × b = b × a is called an identity, in the sense that it
is true whatever a and b may be; while n × X = A is called an equation,
as being true, when n and A are given, for one value only of X.
Similarly the numbers represented by 6/12 and ½ are not identical, but
are equal.

28. _Symbols of Operation._--The failure to observe the distinction
between an identity and an equality often leads to loose reasoning; and
in order to prevent this it is important that definite meanings should
be attached to all symbols of operation, and especially to those which
represent elementary operations. The symbols - and ÷ mean respectively
that the first quantity mentioned is to be reduced or divided by the
second; but there is some vagueness about + and ×. In the present
article a + b will mean that a is taken first, and b added to it; but a
× b will mean that b is taken first, and is then multiplied by a. In the
case of numbers the × may be replaced by a dot; thus 4·3 means 4 times
3. When it is necessary to write the multiplicand before the multiplier,
the symbol [×] will be used, so that b [×] a will mean the same as a ×
b.

29. _Axioms._--There are certain statements that are sometimes regarded
as axiomatic; e.g. that if equals are added to equals the results are
equal, or that if A is greater than B then A + X is greater than B + X.
Such statements, however, are capable of logical proof, and are
generalizations of results obtained empirically at an elementary stage;
they therefore belong more properly to the laws of arithmetic (§ 58).

(ii.) _Sums and Differences._

30. _Addition and Subtraction._--_Addition_ is the process of expressing
(in numeration or notation) a whole, the parts of which have already
been expressed; while, if a whole has been expressed and also a part or
parts, _subtraction_ is the process of expressing the remainder.

Except with very small numbers, addition and subtraction, on the
grouping system, involve analysis and rearrangement. Thus the sum of 8
and 7 cannot be expressed as ones; we can either form the whole, and
regroup it as 10 and 5, or we can split up the 7 into 2 and 5, and add
the 2 to the 8 to form 10, thus getting 8 + 7 = 8 + (2 + 5) = (8 + 2) +
5 = 10 + 5 = 15. For larger numbers the rearrangement is more extensive;
thus 24 + 31 = (20 + 4) + (30 + 1) = (20 + 30) + (4 + 1) = 50 + 5 = 55,
the process being still more complicated when the ones together make
more than ten. Similarly we cannot subtract 8 from 15, if 15 means 1 ten
+ 5 ones; we must either write 15 - 8 = (10 + 5) - 8 = (10 - 8) + 5 = 2
+ 5 = 7, or else resolve the 15 into an inexpressible number of ones,
and then subtract 8 of them, leaving 7.

Numerical quantities, to be added or subtracted, must be in the same
denomination; we cannot, for instance, add 55 shillings and 100 pence,
any more than we can add 3 yards and 2 metres.

31. _Relative Position in the Series._--The above method of dealing with
addition and subtraction is synthetic, and is appropriate to the
grouping method of dealing with number. We commence with processes, and
see what they lead to; and thus get an idea of sums and differences. If
we adopted the counting method, we should proceed in a different way,
our method being analytic.

One number is less or greater than another, according as the symbol (or
ordinal) of the former comes earlier or later than that of the latter in
the number-series. Thus (writing ordinals in light type, and cardinals
in heavy type) 9 comes after 4, and therefore 9 is greater than 4. To
find how much greater, we compare two series, in one of which we go up
to 9, while in the other we stop at 4 and then recommence our counting.
The series are shown below, the numbers being placed horizontally for
convenience of printing, instead of vertically (§ 14):--

  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9
  1  2  3  4  1  2  3  4  5

This exhibits 9 as the sum of 4 and 5; it being understood that the sum
of 4 and 5 means that we add 5 to 4. That this gives the same result as
adding 4 to 5 may be seen by reckoning the series backwards.

It is convenient to introduce the zero; thus

  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9
              0  1  2  3  4  5

indicates that after getting to 4 we make a fresh start from 4 as our
zero.

To subtract, we may proceed in either of two ways. The subtraction of 4
from 9 may mean either "What has to be added to 4 in order to make up a
total of 9," or "To what has 4 to be added in order to make up a total
of 9." For the former meaning we count forwards, till we get to 4, and
then make a new count, parallel with the continuation of the old series,
and see at what number we arrive when we get to 9. This corresponds to
the concrete method, in which we have 9 objects, take away 4 of them,
and recount the remainder. The alternative method is to retrace the
steps of addition, i.e. to count backwards, treating 9 of one (the
standard) series as corresponding with 4 of the other, and finding which
number of the former corresponds with 0 of the latter. This is a more
advanced method, which leads easily to the idea of negative quantities,
if the subtraction is such that we have to go behind the 0 of the
standard series.

32. _Mixed Quantities._--The application of the above principles, and of
similar principles with regard to multiplication and division, to
numerical quantities expressed in any of the diverse British
denominations, presents no theoretical difficulty if the successive
denominations are regarded as constituting a varying scale of notation
(§ 17). Thus the expression 2 ft. 3 in. implies that in counting inches
we use 0 to eleven instead of 0 to 9 as our first repeating series, so
that we put down 1 for the next denomination when we get to twelve
instead of when we get to ten. Similarly 3 yds. 2 ft. means

  yds. 0        1        2        3
  ft.  0  1  2  0  1  2  0  1  2  0  1  2

The practical difficulty, of course, is that the addition of two numbers
produces different results according to the scale in which we are for
the moment proceeding; thus the sum of 9 and 8 is 17, 15, 13 or 11
according as we are dealing with shillings, pence, pounds (avoirdupois)
or ounces. The difficulty may be minimized by using the notation
explained in § 17.

(iii.) _Multiples, Submultiples and Quotients._

33. _Multiplication_ and _Division_ are the names given to certain
numerical processes which have to be performed in order to find the
result of certain arithmetical operations. Each process may arise out of
either of two distinct operations; but the terminology is based on the
processes, not on the operations to which they belong, and the latter
are not always clearly understood.

34. _Repetition and Subdivision._--_Multiplication_ occurs when a
certain number or numerical quantity is treated as a _unit_ (§ 11), and
is taken a certain _number_ of times. It therefore arises in one or
other of two ways, according as the unit or the number exists first in
consciousness. If pennies are arranged in groups of five, the total
amounts arranged are successively once 5d., twice 5d., three times 5d.,
...; which are written 1 × 5d., 2 × 5d., 3 × 5d., ... (§ 28). This
process is _repetition_, and the quantities 1 × 5d., 2 × 5d., 3 × 5d.,
... are the successive _multiples_ of 5d. If, on the other hand, we have
a sum of 5s., and treat a shilling as being equivalent to twelve pence,
the 5s. is equivalent to 5 × 12d.; here the multiplication arises out of
a _subdivision_ of the original unit 1s. into 12d.

Although multiplication may arise in either of these two ways, the
actual process in each case is performed by commencing with the unit and
taking it the necessary number of times. In the above case of
subdivision, for instance, each of the 5 shillings is separately
converted into pence, so that we do in fact find in succession once
12d., twice 12d., ...; i.e. we find the multiples of 12d. up to 5
times.

The result of the multiplication is called the _product_ of the unit by
the number of times it is taken.

35. _Diagram of Multiplication._--The process of multiplication is
performed in order to obtain such results as the following:--

    If 1 boy receives 7 apples,
  then 3 boys receive 21 apples;

or

    If 1s. is equivalent to 12d.,
  then 5s. is equivalent to 60d.

The essential portions of these statements, from the arithmetical point
of view, may be exhibited in the form of the diagrams A and B:--

           A                       B
  +--------+-----------+     +-----+------+
  | 1 boy  |  7 apples |     | 1s. | 12d. |
  +--------+-----------+     +-----+------+
  | 3 boys | 21 apples |     | 5s. | 60d. |
  +--------+-----------+     +-----+------+

or more briefly, as in C or C' and D or D':--

           C                 C'               D           D'
  +---+-----------+      |              +---+------+      |
  | 1 |  7 apples |      |  7 apples    | 1 | 12d. |      | 12d.
  +---+-----------+   ---+-----------   +---+------+   ---+------
  | 3 | 21 apples |    3 | 21 apples    | 5 | 60d. |    5 | 60d.
  +---+-----------+      |              +---+------+      |

the general arrangement of the diagram being as shown in E or E':--

           E                     E'
  +--------+---------+           |
  | 1      | Unit    |           | Unit
  +--------+---------+   --------+---------
  | Number | Product |    Number | Product
  +--------+---------+           |

Multiplication is therefore equivalent to completion of the diagram by
entry of the product.

36. _Multiple-Tables._--The diagram C or D of § 35 is part of a complete
table giving the successive multiples of the particular unit. If we take
several different units, and write down their successive multiples in
parallel columns, preceded by the number-series, we obtain a
_multiple-table_ such as the following:--

  +---+---+----+----+----------+---------------+-------+-----
  | 1 | 1 |  2 |  9 | 1s.  5d. |  3 yds. 2 ft. | 17359 | ...
  +---+---+----+----+----------+---------------+-------+-----
  | 2 | 2 |  4 | 18 | 2s. 10d. |  7 yds. 1 ft. | 34718 | ...
  +---+---+----+----+----------+---------------+-------+-----
  | 3 | 3 |  6 | 27 | 4s.  3d. | 11 yds. 0 ft. | 52077 | ...
  +---+---+----+----+----------+---------------+-------+-----
  | 4 | 4 |  8 | 36 | 5s.  8d. | 14 yds. 2 ft. | 69436 | ...
  +---+---+----+----+----------+---------------+-------+-----
  | 5 | 5 | 10 | 45 | 7s.  1d. | 16 yds. 1 ft. | 86795 | ...
  +---+---+----+----+----------+---------------+-------+-----
  | . | . |  . |  . |    .     |       .       |   .   | ...
  | . | . |  . |  . |    .     |       .       |   .   | ...
  | . | . |  . |  . |    .     |       .       |   .   | ...
  | . | . |  . |  . |    .     |       .       |   .   | ...

It is to be considered that each column may extend downwards
indefinitely.

37. _Successive Multiplication._--In multiplication by repetition the
unit is itself usually a multiple of some other unit, i.e. it is a
product which is taken as a new unit. When this new unit has been
multiplied by a number, we can again take the product as a unit for the
purpose of another multiplication; and so on indefinitely. Similarly
where multiplication has arisen out of the subdivision of a unit into
smaller units, we can again subdivide these smaller units. Thus we get
successive multiplication; but it represents quite different operations
according as it is due to repetition, in the sense of § 34, or to
subdivision, and these operations will be exhibited by different
diagrams. Of the two diagrams below, A exhibits the successive
multiplication of £3 by 20, 12 and 4, and B the successive reduction of
£3 to shillings, pence and farthings. The principle on which the
diagrams are constructed is obvious from § 35. It should be noticed that
in multiplying £3 by 20 we find the value of 20.3, but that in reducing
£3 to shillings, since each £ becomes 20s., we find the value of 3.20.

             A                                 B
            +----+-------+                 +-------+--------+
            |  1 |    £3 |                 |   1d. |    4f. |
      +-----+----+-------+          +------+-------+--------+
      |  1  | 20 |   £60 |          |  1s. |  12d. |        |
  +---+-----+----+-------+     +----+------+-------+--------+
  | 1 | 12  |    |  £720 |     | £1 | 20s. |       |        |
  +---+-----+----+-------+     +----+------+-------+--------+
  | 4 |     |    | £2880 |     | £3 | 60s. | 720d. | 2880f. |
  +---+-----+----+-------+     +----+------+-------+--------+

38. _Submultiples._--The relation of a unit to its successive multiples
as shown in a multiple-table is expressed by saying that it is a
submultiple of the multiples, the successive submultiples being
_one-half, one-third, one-fourth_, ... Thus, in the diagram of § 36, 1s.
5d. is one-half of 2s. 10d., one-third of 4s. 3d., one-fourth of 5s.
8d., ...; these being written "½ of 2s. 10d.," "1/3 of 4s. 3d.," "¼ of
5s. 8d,"...

The relation of submultiple is the converse of that of multiple; thus if
a is 1/5 of b, then b is 5 times a. The determination of a submultiple
is therefore equivalent to completion of the diagram E or E' of § 35 by
entry of the unit, when the number of times it is taken, and the
product, are given. The operation is the converse of repetition; it is
usually called _partition_, as representing division into a number of
equal shares.

39. _Quotients._--The converse of subdivision is the formation of units
into groups, each constituting a larger unit; the number of the groups
so formed out of a definite number of the original units is called a
_quotient_. The determination of a quotient is equivalent to completion
of the diagram by entry of the number when the unit and the product are
given. There is no satisfactory name for the operation, as distinguished
from partition; it is sometimes called measuring, but this implies an
equality in the original units, which is not an essential feature of the
operation.

40. _Division._--From the commutative law for multiplication, which
shows that 3 × 4d. = 4 × 3d. = 12d., it follows that the number of pence
in one-fourth of 12d. is equal to the quotient when 12 pence are formed
into units of 4d.; each of these numbers being said to be obtained by
_dividing_ 12 by 4. The term _division_ is therefore used in text-books
to describe the two processes described in §§ 38 and 39; the product
mentioned in § 34 is the _dividend_, the number or the unit, whichever
is given, is called the _divisor_, and the unit or number which is to be
found is called the _quotient_. The symbol ÷ is used to denote both
kinds of division; thus A ÷ n denotes the unit, n of which make up A,
and A ÷ B denotes the number of times that B has to be taken to make up
A. In the present article this confusion is avoided by writing the
former as 1/n of A.

Methods of division are considered later (§§ 106-108).

41. _Diagrams of Division._--Since we write from left to right or
downwards, it may be convenient for division to interchange the rows or
the columns of the multiplication-diagram. Thus the uncompleted diagram
for partition is F or G, while for measuring it is usually H; the vacant
compartment being for the unit in F or G, and for the number in H. In
some cases it may be convenient in measuring to show both the units, as
in K.

           F                    G                  H               K
  +--------+---------+ +--------+---------+ +---------+---+ +------+-----+
  |    1   |         | | Number | Product | | Unit    | 1 | | 12d. | 1s. |
  +--------+---------+ +--------+---------+ +---------+---+ +------+-----+
  | Number | Product | |    1   |         | | Product |   | | 60d. |     |
  +--------+---------+ +--------+---------+ +---------+---+ +------+-----+

42. _Successive Division_ may be performed as the converse of successive
multiplication. The diagrams A and B below are the converse (with a
slight alteration) of the corresponding diagrams in § 37; A
representing the determination of 1/20 of 1/12 of ¼ of 2880 farthings,
and B the conversion of 2880 farthings into £.

              A                               B
            +---+--------+                      +------+----+
            | 4 | 2880f. |                      | 20s. | £1 |
       +----+---+--------+              +-------+------+----+
       | 12 | 1 |  720f. |              |  12d. |  1s. |    |
  +----+----+---+--------+     +--------+-------+------+----+
  | 20 |  1 |   |   60f. |     |    4f. |   1d. |      |    |
  +----+----+---+--------+     +--------+-------+------+----+
  |  1 |    |   |    3f. |     | 2880f. | 720d. | 60s. | £3 |
  +----+----+---+--------+     +--------+-------+------+----+

(iv.) _Properties of Numbers._

(A) Properties not depending on the Scale of Notation.

43. _Powers, Roots and Logarithms._--The standard series 1, 2, 3, ... is
obtained by successive additions of 1 to the number last found. If
instead of commencing with 1 and making successive additions of 1 we
commence with any number such as 3 and make successive multiplications
by 3, we get a series 3, 9, 27, ... as shown below the line in the
margin. The first member of the series is 3; the second is the product
of two numbers, each equal to 3; the third is the product of three
numbers, each equal to 3; and so on. These are written 3^1 (or 3), 3²,
3³, 3^4, ... where n^p denotes the product of p numbers, each equal to
n. If we write n^p = N, then, if any two of the three numbers n, p, N
are known, the third is determinate. If we know n and p, p is called the
_index_, and n, n², ... n^p are called the _first power, second power,
... pth power_ of n, the series itself being called the _power-series_.
The _second power_ and _third power_ are usually called the _square_ and
_cube_ respectively. If we know p and N, n is called the _pth root_ of
N, so that n is the _second_ (or _square_) _root_ of n², the _third_
(or _cube_) _root_ of n³, the _fourth root_ of n^4, ... If we know n
and N, then p is the _logarithm_ of N to _base_ n.

  0    1 = 3^0   n^0
  ------------------
  1    3 = 3^1   n^1
  2    9 = 3²    n²
  3   27 = 3³    n³
  4   81 = 3^4   n^4
  :    :   :      :
  :    :   :      :

The calculation of powers (i.e. of N when n and p are given) is
_involution_; the calculation of roots (i.e. of n when p and N are
given) is _evolution_; the calculation of logarithms (i.e. of p when n
and N are given) has no special name.

Involution is a direct process, consisting of successive
multiplications; the other two are inverse processes. The calculation of
a logarithm can be performed by successive divisions; evolution requires
special methods.

The above definitions of logarithms, &c., relate to cases in which n and
p are whole numbers, and are generalized later.

44. _Law of Indices._--If we multiply n^p by n^q, we multiply the
product of p n's by the product of q n's, and the result is therefore
n^(p + q). Similarly, if we divide n^p by n^q, where q is less than p,
the result is n^(p - q). Thus multiplication and division in the
power-series correspond to addition and subtraction in the index-series,
and vice versa.

If we divide n^p by n^p, the quotient is of course 1. This should be
written n^0. Thus we may make the power-series commence with 1, if we
make the index-series commence with 0. The added terms are shown above
the line in the diagram in § 43.

45. _Factors, Primes and Prime Factors._--If we take the successive
multiples of 2, 3, ... as in § 36, and place each multiple opposite the
same number in the original series, we get an arrangement as in the
adjoining diagram. If any number N occurs in the vertical series
commencing with a number n (other than 1) then n is said to be a
_factor_ of N. Thus 2, 3 and 6 are factors of 6; and 2, 3, 4, 6 and 12
are factors of 12.

   1   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..
   2    2   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..
   3   ..    3   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..
   4    4   ..    4   ..   ..   ..   ..
   5   ..   ..   ..    5   ..   ..   ..
   6    6    6   ..   ..    6   ..   ..
   7   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..    7   ..
   8    8   ..    8   ..   ..   ..    8
   9   ..    9   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..
  10   10   ..   ..   10   ..   ..   ..
  11   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..
  12   12   12   12   ..   12   ..   ..
   :    :    :    :    :    :    :    :
   :    :    :    :    :    :    :    :

A number (other than 1) which has no factor except itself is called a
_prime number_, or, more briefly, a _prime_. Thus 2, 3, 5, 7 and 11 are
primes, for each of these occurs twice only in the table. A number
(other than 1) which is not a prime number is called a _composite_
number.

If a number is a factor of another number, it is a factor of any
multiple of that number. Hence, if a number has factors, one at least of
these must be a prime. Thus 12 has 6 for a factor; but 6 is not a prime,
one of its factors being 2; and therefore 2 must also be a factor of 12.
Dividing 12 by 2, we get a submultiple 6, which again has a prime 2 as a
factor. Thus any number which is not itself a prime is the product of
several factors, each of which is a prime, e.g. 12 is the product of 2,
2 and 3. These are called _prime factors_.

The following are the most important properties of numbers in reference
to factors:--

(i) If a number is a factor of another number, it is a factor of any
multiple of that number.

(ii) If a number is a factor of two numbers, it is a factor of their sum
or (if they are unequal) of their difference. (The words in brackets are
inserted to avoid the difficulty, at this stage, of saying that every
number is a factor of 0, though it is of course true that 0·n = 0,
whatever n may be.)

(iii) A number can be resolved into prime factors in one way only, no
account being taken of their relative order. Thus 12 = 2 × 2 × 3 = 2 × 3
× 2 = 3 × 2 × 2, but this is regarded as one way only. If any prime
occurs more than once, it is usual to write the number of times of
occurrence as an index; thus 144 = 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 3 × 3 = 2^4 · 3².

The number 1 is usually included amongst the primes; but, if this is
done, the last paragraph requires modification, since 144 could be
expressed as 1 · 2^4 · 3², or as 1² · 2^4 · 3², or as 1^p · 2^4 · 3²,
where p might be anything.

If two numbers have no factor in common (except 1) each is said to be
_prime to_ the other.

The multiples of 2 (including 1·2) are called _even_ numbers; other
numbers are _odd_ numbers.

46. _Greatest Common Divisor._--If we resolve two numbers into their
prime factors, we can find their _Greatest Common Divisor_ or _Highest
Common Factor_ (written G.C.D. or G.C.F. or H.C.F.), i.e. the greatest
number which is a factor of both. Thus 144 = 2^4 · 3², and 756 = 2² ·
3³ · 7, and therefore the G.C.D. of 144 and 756 is 2² · 3² = 36. If we
require the G.C.D. of two numbers, and cannot resolve them into their
prime factors, we use a process described in the text-books. The process
depends on (ii) of § 45, in the extended form that, if x is a factor of
a and b, it is a factor of pa - qb, where p and q are any integers.

The G.C.D. of three or more numbers is found in the same way.

47. _Least Common Multiple._--The _Least Common Multiple_, or L.C.M., of
two numbers, is the least number of which they are both factors. Thus,
since 144 = 2^4 · 3², and 756 = 2² · 3³ · 7, the L.C.M. of 144 and 756
is 2^4 · 3³ · 7. It is clear, from comparison with the last paragraph,
that the product of the G.C.D. and the L.C.M. of two numbers is equal to
the product of the numbers themselves. This gives a rule for finding the
L.C.M. of two numbers. But we cannot apply it to finding the L.C.M. of
three or more numbers; if we cannot resolve the numbers into their prime
factors, we must find the L.C.M. of the first two, then the L.C.M. of
this and the next number, and so on.

(B) Properties depending on the Scale of Notation.

48. _Tests of Divisibility._--The following are the principal rules for
testing whether particular numbers are factors of a given number. The
number is divisible--

(i) by 10 if it ends in 0;

(ii) by 5 if it ends in 0 or 5;

(iii) by 2 if the last digit is even;

(iv) by 4 if the number made up of the last two digits is divisible by 4;

(v) by 8 if the number made up of the last three digits is divisible by 8;

(vi) by 9 if the sum of the digits is divisible by 9;

(vii) by 3 if the sum of the digits is divisible by 3;

(viii) by 11 if the difference between the sum of the 1st, 3rd, 5th, ...
digits and the sum of the 2nd, 4th, 6th, ... is zero or divisible by
11.

(ix) To find whether a number is divisible by 7, 11 or 13, arrange the
number in groups of three figures, beginning from the end, treat each
group as a separate number, and then find the difference between the sum
of the 1st, 3rd, ... of these numbers and the sum of the 2nd, 4th, ...
Then, if this difference is zero or is divisible by 7, 11 or 13, the
original number is also so divisible; and conversely. For example, 31521
gives 521 - 31 = 490, and therefore is divisible by 7, but not by 11 or
13.

49. _Casting out Nines_ is a process based on (vi) of the last
paragraph. The remainder when a number is divided by 9 is equal to the
remainder when the sum of its digits is divided by 9. Also, if the
remainders when two numbers are divided by 9 are respectively a and b,
the remainder when their product is divided by 9 is the same as the
remainder when a·b is divided by 9. This gives a rule for testing
multiplication, which is found in most text-books. It is doubtful,
however, whether such a rule, giving a test which is necessarily
incomplete, is of much educational value.

(v.) _Relative Magnitude._

50. _Fractions._--A _fraction_ of a quantity is a submultiple, or a
multiple of a submultiple, of that quantity. Thus, since 3 × 1s. 5d. =
4s. 3d., 1s. 5d. may be denoted by 1/3 of 4s. 3d.; and any multiple of
1s. 5d., denoted by n × 1s. 5d., may also be denoted by n/3 of 4s. 3d.
We therefore use "n/a of A" to mean that we find a quantity X such that
a × X = A, and then multiply X by n.

It must be noted (i) that this is a definition of "n/a of," not a
definition of "n/a," and (ii) that it is not necessary that n should be
less than a.

51. _Subdivision of Submultiple._--By 5/7 of A we mean 5 times the unit,
7 times which is A. If we regard this unit as being 4 times a lesser
unit, then A is 7·4 times this lesser unit, and 5/7 of A is 5·4 times
the lesser unit. Hence 5/7 of A is equal to (5·4)/(7·4) of A; and,
conversely, (5·4)/(7·4) of A is equal to 5/7 of A. Similarly each of
these is equal to (5·3)/(7·3) of A. Hence the value of a fraction is not
altered by substituting for the numerator and denominator the
corresponding numbers in any other column of a multiple-table (§ 36). If
we write (5·4)/(7·4) in the form (4·5)/(4·7) we may say that the value
of a fraction is not altered by multiplying or dividing the numerator
and denominator by any number.

52. _Fraction of a Fraction._--To find 11/4 of 5/7 of A we must convert
5/7 of A into 4 times some unit. This is done by the preceding
paragraph. For 5/7 of A = (5·4)/(7·4) of A = (4·5)/(7·4) of A; i.e. it
is 4 times a unit which is itself 5 times another unit, 7·4 times, which
is A. Hence, taking the former unit 11 times instead of 4 times,

  11/4 of 5/7 of A = (11·5)/(7·4) of A

A fraction of a fraction is sometimes called a _compound fraction._

53. _Comparison, Addition and Subtraction of Fractions._--The quantities
¾ of A and 5/7 of A are expressed in terms of different units. To
compare them, or to add or subtract them, we must express them in terms
of the same unit. Thus, taking 1/28 of A as the unit, we have (§ 51)

  ¾ of A = 21/28 of A; 5/7 of A = 20/28 of A.

Hence the former is greater than the latter; their sum is 41/28 of A;
and their difference is 1/28 of A.

Thus the fractions must be reduced to a _common denominator_. This
denominator must, if the fractions are in their lowest terms (§ 54), be
a multiple of each of the denominators; it is usually most convenient
that it should be their L.C.M. (§ 47).

54. _Fraction in its Lowest Terms._--A fraction is said to be _in its
lowest terms_ when its numerator and denominator have no common factor;
or to be reduced to its lowest terms when it is replaced by such a
fraction. Thus 8/22 of A is said to be reduced to its lowest terms when
it is replaced by 4/11 of A. It is important always to bear in mind that
4/11 of A is not the _same_ as 8/22 of A, though it is _equal_ to it.

  +------+-----------+
  |   1  |      7d.  |
  +------+-----------+
  |  10  |  5s.10d.  |
  +------+-----------+
  |  24  | 14s.      |
  +------+-----------+

55. _Diagram of Fractional Relation._--To find 10/24 of 14s. we have to
take 10 of the units, 24 of which make up 14s. Hence the required amount
will, in the multiple-table of § 36, be opposite 10 in the column in
which the amount opposite 24 is 14s.; the quantity at the head of this
column, representing the unit, will be found to be 7d. The elements of
the multiple-table with which we are concerned are shown in the diagram
in the margin. This diagram serves equally for the two statements that
(i) 10/24 of 14s. is 5s. 10d., (ii) 24/10 of 5s. 10d. is 14s. The two
statements are in fact merely different aspects of a single relation,
considered in the next section.

           A
  +------+-----------+
  |  10  |  5s. 10d. |
  +------+-----------+
  |  24  | 14s.      |
  +------+-----------+

           B
  +------+-----------+
  |   5  |  5s. 10d. |
  +------+-----------+
  |  12  | 14s.      |
  +------+-----------+

56. _Ratio._--If we omit the two upper compartments of the diagram in
the last section, we obtain the diagram A. This diagram exhibits a
relation between the two amounts 5s. 10d. and 14s. on the one hand, and
the numbers 10 and 24 of the standard series on the other, which is
expressed by saying that 5s. 10d. is to 14s. in the _ratio_ of 10 to 24,
or that 14s. is to 5s. 10d. in the ratio of 24 to 10. If we had taken
1s. 2d. instead of 7d. as the unit for the second column, we should have
obtained the diagram B. Thus we must regard the ratio of a to b as being
the same as the ratio of c to d, if the fractions a/b and c/d are equal.
For this reason the ratio of a to b is sometimes written a/b, but the
more correct method is to write it a:b.

If two quantities or numbers P and Q are to each other in the ratio of p
to q, it is clear from the diagram that p times Q = q times P, so that Q
= q/p of P.

57. _Proportion._--If from any two columns in the table of § 36 we
remove the numbers or quantities in any two rows, we get a diagram such
as that here shown. The pair of compartments on either side may, as
here, contain numerical quantities, or may contain numbers. But the two
pairs of compartments will correspond to a single pair of numbers, e.g.
2 and 6, in the standard series, so that, denoting them by M, N and P, Q
respectively, M will be to N in the same ratio that P is to Q.

  +----------+---------------+
  | 2s. 10d. |  7 yds. 1 ft. |
  +----------+---------------+
  | 8s.  6d. | 22 yds.       |
  +----------+---------------+

This is expressed by saying that M is to N as P to Q, the relation being
written M : N :: P : Q; the four quantities are then said to be _in
proportion_ or to be _proportionals_.

  +---+---+
  | M | P |
  +---+---+
  | N | Q |
  +---+---+

This is the most general expression of the relative magnitude of two
quantities; i.e. the relation expressed by proportion includes the
relations expressed by multiple, submultiple, fraction and ratio.

If M and N are respectively m and n times a unit, and P and Q are
respectively p and q times a unit, then the quantities are in proportion
if mq = np; and conversely.

IV. LAWS OF ARITHMETIC

58. _Laws of Arithmetic._--The arithmetical processes which we have
considered in reference to positive integral numbers are subject to the
following laws:--

(i) _Equalities and Inequalities._--The following are sometimes called
_Axioms_ (§ 29), but their truth should be proved, even if at an early
stage it is assumed. The symbols ">" and "<" mean respectively "is
greater than" and "is less than." The numbers represented by a, b, c, x
and m are all supposed to be positive.

  (a) If a = b, and b = c. then a = c;
  (b) If a = b, then a + x = b + x, and a - x = b - x;
  (c) If a > b, then a + x > b + x, and a - x > b - x;
  (d) If a < b, then a + b < b + x, and a - x < b - x;
  (e) If a = b, then ma = mb, and a ÷ m = b ÷ m;
  (f) If a > b, then ma > mb, and a ÷ m > b ÷ m;
  (g) If a < b, then ma < mb, and a ÷ m < b ÷ m.

(ii) _Associative Law for Additions and Subtractions._--This law
includes the _rule of signs_, that a - (b - c) = a - b + c; and it
states that, subject to this, successive operations of addition or
subtraction may be grouped in sets in any way; e.g. a - b + c + d + e -
f = a - (b - c) + (d + e - f).

(iii) _Commutative Law for Additions and Subtractions_, that additions
and subtractions may be performed in any order; e.g. a - b + c + d = a +
c - b + d = a - b + c - b.

(iv) _Associative Law for Multiplications and Divisions._--This law
includes a rule, similar to the rule of signs, to the effect that
a÷(b÷c) = a ÷ b [×] c; and it states that, subject to this, successive
operations of multiplication or division may be grouped in sets in any
way; e.g. a b [×] c [×] d [×] e ÷ f = a ÷ (b ÷ c) [×] (d [×] e ÷ f).

(v) _Commutative Law for Multiplications and Divisions_, that
multiplications and divisions may be performed in any order: e.g. a ÷ b
[×] c [×] d = a [×] c ÷ b [×] d = a [×] d [×] c ÷ b.

(vi) _Distributive Law_, that multiplications and divisions may be
distributed over additions and subtractions, e.g. that m(a + b - c) =
m·a + m·b - m·c, or that (a + b - c) ÷ n = (a ÷ n) + (b ÷ n) + (c ÷ n).

In the case of (ii), (iii) and (vi), the letters a, b, c, ... may denote
either numbers or numerical quantities, while m and n denote numbers; in
the case of (iv) and (v) the letters denote numbers only.

59. _Results of Inverse Operations._--Addition, multiplication and
involution are direct processes; and, if we start with positive
integers, we continue with positive integers throughout. But, in
attempting the inverse processes of subtraction, division, and either
evolution or determination of index, the data may be such that a process
cannot be performed. We can, however, denote the result of the process
by a symbol, and deal with this symbol according to the laws of
arithmetic. In this way we arrive at (i) negative numbers, (ii)
fractional numbers, (iii) surds, (iv) logarithms (in the ordinary sense
of the word).

60. _Simple Formulae._--The following are some simple formulae which
follow from the laws stated in § 58.

(i) (a + b + c + ...)(p + q + r + ...) = (ap + aq + ar + ...) + (bp + bq
+ br + ...) + (cp + cq + cr + ...)+ ...; i.e. the product of two or more
numbers, each of which consists of two or more parts, is the sum of the
products of each part of the one with each part of the other.

(ii) (a + b)(a - b) = a² - b²; i.e. the product of the sum and the
difference of two numbers is equal to the difference of their squares.

(iii) (a + b)² = a² + 2ab + b² = a² + (2a + b)b.

V. NEGATIVE NUMBERS

61. _Negative Numbers_ may be regarded as resulting from the commutative
law for addition and subtraction. According to this law, 10 + 3 + 6 - 7
= 10 + 3 - 7 + 6 = 3 + 6 - 7 + 10 = &c. But, if we write the expression
as 3 - 7 + 6 + 10, this means that we must first subtract 7 from 3. This
cannot be done; but the result of the subtraction, if it could be done,
is something which, when 6 is added to it, becomes 3 - 7 + 6 = 3 + 6 - 7
= 2. The result of 3 - 7 is the same as that of 0 - 4; and we may write
it "-4," and call it a _negative number_, if by this we mean something
possessing the property that -4 + 4 = 0.

This, of course, is unintelligible on the grouping system of treating
number; on the counting system it merely means that we count backwards
from 0, just as we might count inches backwards from a point marked 0 on
a scale. It should be remembered that the counting is performed with
something as unit. If this unit is A, then what we are really
considering is -4A; and this means, not that A is multiplied by -4, but
that A is multiplied by 4, and the product is taken negatively. It would
therefore be better, in some ways, to retain the unit throughout, and to
describe -4A as a _negative quantity_, in order to avoid confusion with
the "negative numbers" with which operations are performed in formal
algebra.

The positive quantity or number obtained from a negative quantity or
number by omitting the "-" is called its _numerical value_.

VI. FRACTIONAL AND DECIMAL NUMBERS

62. _Fractional Numbers._--According to the definition in § 50 the
quantity denoted by 3/6 of A is made up of a number, 3, and a unit,
which is one-sixth of A. Similarly p/n of A, q/n of A, r/n of A, ...
mean quantities which are respectively p times, q times r times, ... the
unit, n of which make up A. Thus any arithmetical processes which can be
applied to the numbers p, q, r, ... can be applied to p/n, q/n, r/n, ...,
the denominator n remaining unaltered.

If we denote the unit 1/n of A by X, then A is n times X, and p/n of n
times X is p times X; i.e. p/n of n times is p times.

Hence, so long as the denominator remains unaltered, we can deal with
performed on the numerators. The expressions p/n, q/n, r/n, ... are then
_fractional numbers_, their relation to ordinary or _integral_ numbers
being that p/n times n times is equal to p times.

This relation is of exactly the same kind as the relation of the
successive digits in numbers expressed in a scale of notation whose base
is n. Hence we can treat the fractional numbers which have any one
denominator as constituting a number-series, as shown in the adjoining
diagram. The result of taking 13 sixths of A is then seen to be the same
as the result of taking twice A and one-sixth of A, so that we may
regard 13/6 as being equal to 2(1/6). A fractional number is called a
_proper fraction_ or an _improper fraction_ according as the numerator
is or is not less than the denominator; and an expression such as 2(1/6)
is called a mixed number. An improper fraction is therefore equal either
to an integer or to a mixed number. It will be seen from § 17 that a
mixed number corresponds with what is there called a _mixed quantity_.
Thus £3, 17s. is a mixed quantity, being expressed in pounds and
shillings; to express it in terms of pounds only we must write it
£3(17/20).

  Ones.  Sixths.
    0       0
            1
            2
            3
            4
            5
    1       0
            1
            2
            3
            4
            5
    2       0
            1
            :
            :

63. _Fractional Numbers with different Denominators._--If we divided the
unit into halves, and these new units into thirds, we should get sixths
of the original unit, as shown in A; while, if we divided the unit into
thirds, and these new units into halves, we should again get sixths, but
as shown in B. The series of halves in the one case, and of thirds in
the other, are entirely different series of fractional numbers, but we
can compare them by putting each in its proper position in relation to
the series of sixths. Thus 3/2 is equal to 9/6, and 5/3 is equal to
10/6, and conversely; in other words, any fractional number is
equivalent to the fractional number obtained by multiplying or dividing
the numerator and denominator by any integer. We can thus find
fractional numbers equivalent to the sum or difference of any two
fractional numbers. The process is the same as that of finding the sum
or difference of 3 sixpences and 5 fourpences; we cannot subtract 3
sixpenny-bits from 5 fourpenny-bits, but we can express each as an
equivalent number of pence, and then perform the subtraction. Generally,
to find the sum or difference of two or more fractional numbers, we must
replace them by other fractional numbers having the same denominator; it
is usually most convenient to take as this denominator the L.C.M. of the
original fractional numbers (cf. § 53).

           A                             B
  Ones. Halves. Sixths.         Ones. Thirds. Sixths.
    0      0       0              0      0       0
                   1                             1
                   2                     1       0
           1       0                             1
                   1                     2       0
                   2                             1
    1      0       0              1      0       0
                   :                             :
                   :                             :

64. _Complex Fractions._--A fraction (or fractional number), the
numerator or denominator of which is a fractional number, is called a
_complex_ fraction (or fractional number), to distinguish it from a
_simple_ fraction, which is a fraction having integers for numerator and
denominator. Thus 5(2/3)/11(1/3) of A means that we take a unit X such
that 11(1/3) times X is equal to A, and then take 5(2/3) times X. To
simplify this, we take a new unit Y, which is 1/3 of X. Then A is 34
times Y, and 5(2/3)/11(1/3) of A is 17 times Y, i.e. it is ½ of A.

65. _Multiplication of Fractional Numbers._--To multiply 8/3 by 5/7 is
to take 5/7 times 8/3. It has already been explained (§ 62) that 5/7
times is an operation such that 5/7 times 7 times is equal to 5 times.
Hence we must express 8/3, which itself means 8/3 times, as being 7
times something. This is done by multiplying both numerator and
denominator by 7; i.e. 8/3 is equal to (7·8)/(7·3), which is the same
thing as 7 times 8/(7·3). Hence 5/7 times 8/3 = 5/7 times 7 times
8/(7·3) = 5 times 8/(7·3) = (5·8)/(7·3). The rule for multiplying a
fractional number by a fractional number is therefore the same as the
rule for finding a fraction of a fraction.

66. _Division of Fractional Numbers._--To divide 8/3 by 5/7 is to find a
number (i.e. a fractional number) x such that 5/7 times x is equal to
8/3. But 7/5 times 5/7 times x is, by the last section, equal to x.
Hence x is equal to 7/5 times 8/3. Thus to divide by a fractional number
we must multiply by the number obtained by interchanging the numerator
and the denominator, i.e. by the _reciprocal_ of the original number.

If we divide 1 by 5/7 we obtain, by this rule, 7/5. Thus the reciprocal
of a number may be defined as the number obtained by dividing 1 by it.
This definition applies whether the original number is integral or
fractional.

By means of the present and the preceding sections the rule given in §
63 can be extended to the statement that a fractional number is equal to
the number obtained by multiplying its numerator and its denominator by
any fractional number.

67. _Negative Fractional Numbers._--We can obtain negative fractional
numbers in the same way that we obtain negative integral numbers; thus
-(5/7) or -(5/7)A means that 5/7 or (5/7)A is taken negatively.

68. _Genesis of Fractional Numbers._--A fractional number may be
regarded as the result of a measuring division (§ 39) which cannot be
performed exactly. Thus we cannot divide 3 in. by 11 in. exactly, i.e.
we cannot express 3 in. as an integral multiple of 11 in.; but, by
extending the meaning of "times" as in § 62, we can say that 3 in. is
3/11 times 11 in., and therefore call 3/11 the quotient when 3 in. is
divided by 11 in. Hence, if p and n are numbers, p/n is sometimes
regarded as denoting the result of dividing p by n, whether p and n are
integral or fractional (mixed numbers being included in fractional).

The idea and properties of a fractional number having been explained, we
may now call it, for brevity, a _fraction_. Thus "2/3 of A" no longer
means two of the units, three of which make up A; it means that A is
multiplied by the fraction 2/3, i.e. it means the same thing as "2/3
times A."

69. _Percentage._--In order to deal, by way of comparison or addition or
subtraction, with fractions which have different denominators, it is
necessary to reduce them to a common denominator. To avoid this
difficulty, in practical life, it is usual to confine our operations to
fractions which have a certain standard denominator. Thus (§ 79) the
Romans reckoned in twelfths, and the Babylonians in sixtieths; the
former method supplied a basis for division by 2, 3, 4, 6 or 12, and the
latter for division by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30, or 60. The
modern method is to deal with fractions which have 100 as denominator;
such fractions are called _percentages_. They only apply accurately to
divisions by 2, 4, 5, 10, 20, 25 or 50; but they have the convenience of
fitting in with the denary scale of notation, and they can be extended
to other divisions by using a mixed number as numerator. One-fortieth,
for instance, can be expressed as (2½)/100, which is called 2½ _per
cent._, and usually written 2½%. Similarly 3(1/3)% is equal to
one-thirtieth.

If the numerator is a multiple of 5, the fraction represents twentieths.
This is convenient, e.g. for expressing _rates in the pound_; thus 15%
denotes the process of taking 3s. for every £1, i.e. a rate of 3s. in
the £.

In applications to money "per cent." sometimes means "per £100." Thus
"£3, 17s. 6d. per cent." is really the complex fraction

     17(6/12)
   3 -------
       20
  ------------ .
      100

70. _Decimal Notation of Percentage._--An integral percentage, i.e. a
simple fraction with 100 for denominator, can be expressed by writing
the two figures of the numerator (or, if there is only one figure, this
figure preceded by 0) with a dot or "point" before them; thus .76 means
76%, or 76/100. If there is an integral number to be taken as well as a
percentage, this number is written in front of the point; thus 23.76 × A
means 23 times A, with 76% of A. We might therefore denote 76% by 0.76.

If as our unit we take X = 1/100 of A = 1% of A, the above quantity
might equally be written 2376 X = 2376/100 of A; i.e. 23.76 × A is equal
to 2376% of A.

71. _Approximate Expression by Percentage._--When a fraction cannot be
expressed by an integral percentage, it can be so expressed
approximately, by taking the _nearest_ integer to the numerator of an
equal fraction having 100 for its denominator. Thus 1/7 = 14(2/7)/100,
so that 1/7 is approximately equal to 14%; and 2/7 = 28(4/7)/100, which
is approximately equal to 29%. The difference between this approximate
percentage and the true value is less than ½%, i.e. is less than 1/200.

If the numerator of the fraction consists of an integer and ½--e.g. in
the case of 3/8 = (37½)/100--it is uncertain whether we should take the
next lowest or the next highest integer. It is best in such cases to
retain the ½; thus we can write 3/8 = 37½ % = .37½.

72. _Addition and Subtraction of Percentages._--The sum or difference of
two percentages is expressed by the sum or difference of the numbers
expressing the two percentages.

73. _Percentage of a Percentage._--Since 37% of 1 is expressed by 0.37,
37% of 1% (i.e. of 0.01) might similarly be expressed by 0.00.37. The
second point, however, is omitted, so that we write it 0.0037 or .0037,
this expression meaning 37/100 of 1/100 = 37/10000.

On the same principle, since 37% of 45% is equal to 37/100 of 45/100 =
1665/10000 = 16/100 + (65/100 of 1/100), we can express it by .1665; and
3% of 2% can be expressed by .0006. Hence, to find a percentage of a
percentage, we multiply the two numbers, put 0's in front if necessary
to make up four figures (not counting fractions), and prefix the point.

74. _Decimal Fractions._--The percentage-notation can be extended to any
fraction which has any power of 10 for its denominator. Thus 153/1000
can be written .153 and 15300/100000 can be written .15300. These two
fractions are equal to each other, and also to .1530. A fraction written
in this way is called a _decimal fraction_; or we might define a decimal
fraction as a fraction having a power of 10 for its denominator, there
being a special notation for writing such fractions.

A mixed number, the fractional part of which is a decimal fraction, is
expressed by writing the integral part in front of the point, which is
called the _decimal point_. Thus 27(1530/10000) can be written
27.1530. This number, expressed in terms of the fraction 1/10000 or
.0001, would be 271530. Hence the successive figures after the decimal
point have the same relation to each other and to the figures before the
point as if the point did not exist. The point merely indicates the
_denomination_ in which the number is expressed: the above number,
expressed in terms of 1/16, would be 271.530, but expressed in terms of
100 it would be .271530.

Fractions other than decimal fractions are usually called _vulgar
fractions_.

75. _Decimal Numbers._--Instead of regarding the .153 in 27.153 as
meaning 153/1000, we may regard the different figures in the expression
as denoting numbers in the successive orders of submultiples of 1 on a
denary scale. Thus, on the grouping system, 27.153 will mean 2.10 + 7 +
1/10 + 5/10² + 3/10³, while on the counting system it will mean the
result of counting through the tens to 2, then through the ones to 7,
then through tenths to 1, and so on. A number made up in this way may be
called a _decimal number_, or, more briefly, a _decimal_. It will be
seen that the definition includes integral numbers.

76. _Sums and Differences of Decimals._--To add or subtract decimals, we
must reduce them to the same denomination, i.e. if one has more figures
after the decimal point than the other, we must add sufficient 0's to
the latter to make the numbers of figures equal. Thus, to add 5.413 to
3.8, we must write the latter as 3.800. Or we may treat the former as
the sum of 5.4 and .013, and recombine the .013 with the sum of 3.8 and
5.4.

77. _Product of Decimals._--To multiply two decimals exactly, we
multiply them as if the point were absent, and then insert it so that
the number of figures after the point in the product shall be equal to
the sum of the numbers of figures after the points in the original
decimals.

In actual practice, however, decimals only represent approximations, and
the process has to be modified (§ 111).

78. _Division by Decimal._--To divide one decimal by another, we must
reduce them to the same denomination, as explained in § 76, and then
omit the decimal points. Thus 5.413 ÷ 3.8 = (5413/1000) ÷ (3800/1000) =
5413 ÷ 3800.

79. _Historical Development of Fractions and Decimals._--The fractions
used in ancient times were mainly of two kinds: unit-fractions, i.e.
fractions representing aliquot parts (§ 103), and fractions with a
definite denominator.

The Egyptians as a rule used only unit-fractions, other fractions being
expressed as the sum of unit-fractions. The only known exception was the
use of 2/3 as a single fraction. Except in the case of 2/3 and ½, the
fraction was expressed by the denominator, with a special symbol above
it.

The Babylonians expressed numbers less than 1 by the numerator of a
fraction with denominator 60; the numerator only being written. The
choice of 60 appears to have been connected with the reckoning of the
year as 360 days; it is perpetuated in the present subdivision of
angles.

The Greeks originally used unit-fractions, like the Egyptians; later
they introduced the sexagesimal fractions of the Babylonians, extending
the system to four or more successive subdivisions of the unit
representing a degree. They also, but apparently still later and only
occasionally, used fractions of the modern kind. In the sexagesimal
system the numerators of the successive fractions (the denominators of
which were the successive powers of 60) were followed by ', ", "', "",
the denominator not being written. This notation survives in reference
to the minute (') and second (") of angular measurement, and has been
extended, by analogy, to the foot (') and inch ("). Since [xi]
represented 60, and [omicron] was the next letter, the latter appears to
have been used to denote absence of one of the fractions; but it is not
clear that our present sign for zero was actually derived from this. In
the case of fractions of the more general kind, the numerator was
written first with ', and then the denominator, followed by ", was
written twice. A different method was used by Diophantus, accents being
omitted, and the denominator being written above and to the right of the
numerator.

The Romans commonly used fractions with denominator 12; these were
described as _unciae_ (ounces), being twelfths of the _as_ (pound).

The modern system of placing the numerator above the denominator is due
to the Hindus; but the dividing line is a later invention. Various
systems were tried before the present notation came to be generally
accepted. Under one system, for instance, the continued sum 4/5 + 1/(7 ×
5) + 3/(8 × 7 × 5) would be denoted by (3 1 4)/(8 7 5); this is somewhat
similar in principle to a decimal notation, but with digits taken in the
reverse order.

Hindu treatises on arithmetic show the use of fractions, containing a
power of 10 as denominator, as early as the beginning of the 6th century
A.D. There was, however, no development in the direction of decimals in
the modern sense, and the Arabs, by whom the Hindu notation of integers
was brought to Europe, mainly used the sexagesimal division in the ' "
"' notation. Even where the decimal notation would seem to arise
naturally, as in the case of approximate extraction of a square root,
the portion which might have been expressed as a decimal was converted
into sexagesimal fractions. It was not until A.D. 1585 that a decimal
notation was published by Simon Stevinus of Bruges. It is worthy of
notice that the invention of this notation appears to have been due to
practical needs, being required for the purpose of computation of
compound interest. The present decimal notation, which is a development
of that of Stevinus, was first used in 1617 by H. Briggs, the computer
of logarithms.

80. _Fractions of Concrete Quantities._--The British systems of coinage,
weights, lengths, &c., afford many examples of the use of fractions.
These may be divided into three classes, as follows:--

(i) The fraction of a concrete quantity may itself not exist as a
concrete quantity, but be represented by a token. Thus, if we take a
shilling as a unit, we may divide it into 12 or 48 smaller units; but
corresponding coins are not really portions of a shilling, but objects
which help us in counting. Similarly we may take the farthing as a unit,
and invent smaller units, represented either by tokens or by no material
objects at all. Ten marks, for instance, might be taken as equivalent to
a farthing; but 13 marks are not equivalent to anything except one
farthing and three out of the ten acts of counting required to arrive at
another farthing.

(ii) In the second class of cases the fraction of the unit quantity is a
quantity of the same kind, but cannot be determined with absolute
exactness. Weights come in this class. The ounce, for instance, is
one-sixteenth of the pound, but it is impossible to find 16 objects such
that their weights shall be exactly equal and that the sum of their
weights shall be exactly equal to the weight of the standard pound.

(iii) Finally, there are the cases of linear measurement, where it is
theoretically possible to find, by geometrical methods, an exact
submultiple of a given unit, but both the unit and the submultiple are
not really concrete objects, but are spatial relations embodied in
objects.

Of these three classes, the first is the least abstract and the last the
most abstract. The first only involves number and counting. The second
involves the idea of _equality_ as a necessary characteristic of the
units or subunits that are used. The third involves also the idea of
_continuity_ and therefore of unlimited subdivision. In weighing an
object with ounce-weights the fact that it weighs more than 1 lb. 3 oz.
but less than 1 lb. 4 oz. does not of itself suggest the necessity or
possibility of subdivision of the ounce for purposes of greater
accuracy. But in measuring a distance we may find that it is "between"
two distances differing by a unit of the lowest denomination used, and a
subdivision of this unit follows naturally.

VII. APPROXIMATION

81. _Approximate Character of Numbers._--The numbers (integral or
decimal) by which we represent the results of arithmetical operations
are often only approximately correct. All numbers, for instance, which
represent physical measurements, are limited in their accuracy not only
by our powers of measurement but also by the accuracy of the measure we
use as our unit. Also most fractions cannot be expressed exactly as
decimals; and this is also the case for surds and logarithms, as well as
for the numbers expressing certain ratios which arise out of geometrical
relations. Even where numbers are supposed to be exact, calculations
based on them can often only be approximate. We might, for instance,
calculate the exact cost of 3 lb. 5 oz. of meat at 9½ d. a lb., but
there are no coins in which we could pay this exact amount.

When the result of any arithmetical operation or operations is
represented approximately but not exactly by a number, the excess
(positive or negative) of this number over the number which would
express the result exactly is called the _error_.

82. _Degree of Accuracy._--There are three principal ways of expressing
the degree of accuracy of any number, i.e. the extent to which it is
equal to the number it is intended to represent.

(i) A number can be _correct to_ so many _places of decimals_. This
means (cf. § 71) that the number differs from the true value by less
than one-half of the unit represented by 1 in the last place of
decimals. For instance, .143 represents 1/7 correct to 3 places of
decimals, since it differs from it by less than .0005. The final figure,
in a case like this, is said to be _corrected_.

This method is not good for comparative purposes. Thus .143 and 14.286
represent respectively 1/7 and 100/7 to the same number of places of
decimals, but the latter is obviously more exact than the former.

(ii) A number can be correct to so many _significant figures_. The
significant figures of a number are those which commence with the first
figure other than zero in the number; thus the significant figures of
13.027 and of .00013027 are the same.

This is the usual method; but the relative accuracy of two numbers
expressed to the same number of significant figures depends to a certain
extent on the magnitude of the first figure. Thus .14286 and .85714
represent 1/7 and 6/7 correct to 5 significant figures; but the latter
is relatively more accurate than the former. For the former shows only
that 1/7 lies between .142855 and .142865, or, as it is better
expressed, between .14285½ and .14286½; but the latter shows that 6/7
lies between .85713½ and .85714½, and therefore that 1/7 lies between
.14285-7/12 and .14285-9/12.

In either of the above cases, and generally in any case where a number
is known to be within a certain limit on each side of the stated value,
the _limit of error_ is expressed by the sign ±. Thus the former of the
above two statements would give 1/7 = .14286 ± .000005. It should be
observed that the numerical value of the error is to be subtracted from
or added to the stated value according as the error is positive or
negative.

(iii) The limit of error can be expressed as a fraction of the number as
stated. Thus 1/7 = .143 ± .0005 can be written 1/7 = 143(1 ± 1/286).

83. _Accuracy after Arithmetical Operations._--If the numbers which are
the subject of operations are not all exact, the accuracy of the result
requires special investigation in each case.

Additions and subtractions are simple. If, for instance, the values of a
and b, correct to two places of decimals, are 3.58 and 1.34, then 2.24,
as the value of a-b, is not necessarily correct to two places. The limit
of error of each being ±.005, the limit of error of their sum or
difference is ±.01.

For multiplication we make use of the formula (§ 60 (i)) (a' ±
[alpha])(b' ± [beta]) = a'b' + [alpha][beta] ± (a'[beta] + b'[alpha]).
If a' and b' are the stated values, and ±[alpha] and ±[beta] the
respective limits of error, we ought strictly to take a'b' +
[alpha][beta] as the product, with a limit of error ±(a'[beta] +
b'[alpha]). In practice, however, both [alpha][beta] and a certain
portion of a'b' are small in comparison with a'[beta] and b'[alpha], and
we therefore replace a'b' + [alpha][beta] by an approximate value, and
increase the limit of error so as to cover the further error thus
introduced. In the case of the two numbers given in the last paragraph,
the product lies between 3.575 × 1.335 = 4.772625 and 3.585 × 1.345 =
4.821825. We might take the product as (3.58 × 1.34) + (.005)² =
4.797225, the limits of error being ±.005(3.58 + 1.34) = ±.0246; but it
is more convenient to write it in such a form as 4.797 ± .025 or 4.80 ±
.03.

If the number of decimal places to which a result is to be accurate is
determined beforehand, it is usually not necessary in the actual working
to go to more than two or three places beyond this. At the close of the
work the extra figures are dropped, the last figure which remains being
corrected (§ 82 (i)) if necessary.

VIII. SURDS AND LOGARITHMS

84. _Roots and Surds._--The pth root of a number (§ 43) may, if the
number is an integer, be found by expressing it in terms of its prime
factors; or, if it is not an integer, by expressing it as a fraction in
its lowest terms, and finding the pth roots of the numerator and of the
denominator separately. Thus to find the cube root of 1728, we write it
in the form 2^6 · 3³, and find that its cube root is 2² · 3 = 12; or, to
find the cube root of 1.728, we write it as 1728/1000 = 216/125 = (2³ ·
3³)/5³, and find that the cube root is (2·3)/5 = 1.2. Similarly the cube
root of 2197 is 13. But we cannot find any number whose cube is 2000.

It is, however, possible to find a number whose cube shall approximate
as closely as we please to 2000. Thus the cubes of 12.5 and of 12.6 are
respectively 1953.125 and 2000.376, so that the number whose cube
differs as little as possible from 2000 is somewhere between 12.5 and
12.6. Again the cube of 12.59 is 1995.616979, so that the number lies
between 12.59 and 12.60. We may therefore consider that there is some
number x whose cube is 2000, and we can find this number to any degree
of accuracy that we please.

A number of this kind is called a _surd_; the surd which is the pth root
of N is written [root p]N, but if the index is 2 it is usually omitted,
so that the square root of N is written [root]N.

85. _Surd as a Power._--We have seen (§§ 43, 44) that, if we take the
successive powers of a number N, commencing with 1, they may be written
N^0, N^1, N², N³, ..., the series of indices being the standard series;
and we have also seen (§ 44) that multiplication of any two of these
numbers corresponds to addition of their indices. Hence we may insert in
the power-series numbers with fractional indices, provided that the
multiplication of these numbers follows the same law. The number denoted
by N^(1/3) will therefore be such that N^(1/3) × N^(1/3) × N^(1/3) =
N^(1/3 + 1/3 + 1/3) = N; i.e. it will be the cube root of N. By analogy
with the notation of fractional numbers, N^(2/3) will be N^(1/3 + 1/3) =
N^(1/3) × N^(1/3); and, generally, N^(p/q) will mean the product of p
numbers, the product of q of which is equal to N. Thus N^(2/6) will not
mean the _same_ as N^(1/3), but will mean the square of N^(1/6); but
this will be _equal_ to N^(1/3), i.e. ([root 6]N)² = [root 3]N.

86. _Multiplication and Division of Surds._--To add or subtract
fractional numbers, we must reduce them to a common denominator; and
similarly, to multiply or divide surds, we must express them as
power-numbers with the same index. Thus ([root 3]2) × ([root]5) =
2^(1/3) × 5^(½) = 2^(2/6) × 5^(3/6) = 4^(1/6) × 125^(1/6) = 500^(1/6) =
[root 6]500.

87. _Antilogarithms._--If we take a fixed number, e.g. 2, as base, and
take as indices the successive decimal numbers to any particular number
of places of decimals, we get a series of _antilogarithms_ of the
indices to this base. Thus, if we go to two places of decimals, we have
as the integral series the numbers 1, 2, 4, 8, ... which are the values
of 2^0, 2^1, 2², ... and we insert within this series the successive
powers of x, where x is such that x^100 = 2. We thus get the numbers
2^.01, 2^.02, 2^.03, ..., which are the antilogarithms of .01, .02, .03,
... to base 2; the first antilogarithm being 2^.00 = 1, which is thus
the antilogarithm of 0 to this (or any other) base. The series is formed
by successive multiplication, and any antilogarithm to a larger number
of decimal places is formed from it in the same way by multiplication.
If, for instance, we have found 2^(.31), then the value of 2^(.316) is
found from it by multiplying by the 6th power of the 1000th root of 2.

For practical purposes the number taken as base is 10; the convenience
of this being that the increase of the index by an integer means
multiplication by the corresponding power of 10, i.e. it means a
shifting of the decimal point. In the same way, by dividing by powers of
10 we may get negative indices.

88. _Logarithms._--If N is the antilogarithm of p to the base a, i.e. if
N = a^p, then p is called the logarithm of N to the base a, and is
written log_a N. As the table of antilogarithms is formed by successive
multiplications, so the logarithm of any given number is in theory
found by successive divisions. Thus, to find the logarithm of a number
to base 2, the number being greater than 1, we first divide repeatedly
by 2 until we get a number between 1 and 2; then divide repeatedly by
[root 10]2 until we get a number between 1 and [root 10]2; then divide
repeatedly by [root 100]2; and so on. If, for instance, we find that the
number is approximately equal to 2³ × ([root 10]2)^5 × ([root 100]2)^7
× ([root 1000]2)^4, it may be written 2^(3.574), and its logarithm to
base 2 is 3.574.

For a further explanation of logarithms, and for an explanation of the
treatment of cases in which an antilogarithm is less than 1, see
LOGARITHM.

For practical purposes logarithms are usually calculated to base 10, so
that log10 10 = 1, log10 100 = 2, &c.

IX. UNITS

89. _Change of Denomination_ of a numerical quantity is usually called
_reduction_, so that this term covers, e.g., the expression of £153, 7s.
4d. as shillings and pence and also the expression of 3067s. 4d. as £,
s. and d.

The usual statement is that to express £153, 7s. as shillings we
multiply 153 by 20 and add 7. This, as already explained (§ 37), is
incorrect. £153 denotes 153 units, each of which is £1 or 20s.; and
therefore we must multiply 20s. by 153 and add 7s., i.e. multiply 20 by
153 (the unit being now 1s.) and add 7. This is the expression of the
process on the grouping method. On the counting method we have a scale
with every 20th shilling marked as a £; there are 153 of these 20's, and
7 over.

                    A
                +-------------+---------+
                |     1s.     |    12d. |
  +-------------+-------------+---------+
  |£1           |    20s.     |         |
  +-------------+-------------+---------+
  |£153, 7s. 4d.|  3067s. 4d. | 36808d. |
  +-------------+-------------+---------+

                    B
            +-----------+---------------+
            |   20s.    | £1            |
  +---------+-----------+---------------+
  |    12d. |    1s.    |               |
  +---------+-----------+---------------+
  | 36808d. | 3067s. 4d.| £153, 7s. 4d. |
  +---------+-----------+---------------+

The simplest case, in which the quantity can be expressed as an integral
number of the largest units involved, has already been considered (§§
37, 42). The same method can be applied in other cases by regarding a
quantity expressed in several denominations as a fractional number of
units of the largest denomination mentioned; thus 7s. 4d. is to be taken
as meaning 7(4/12)s., but £0, 7s. 4d. as £0 (7(4/12))/20 (§ 17). The
reduction of £153, 7s. 4d. to pence, and of 36808d. to £, s. d., on this
principle, is shown in diagrams A and B above.

For reduction of pounds to shillings, or shillings to pounds, we must
consider that we have a multiple-table (§ 36) in which the multiples of
£1 and of 20s. are arranged in parallel columns; and similarly for
shillings and pence.

90. _Change of Unit._--The statement "£153 = 3060s." is not a statement
of _equality_ of the same kind as the statement "153 × 20 = 3060," but
only a statement of _equivalence_ for certain purposes; in other words,
it does not convey an absolute truth. It is therefore of interest to see
whether we cannot replace it by an absolute truth.

To do this, consider what the ordinary processes of multiplication and
division mean in reference to concrete objects. If we want to give, to 5
boys, 4 apples each, we are said to multiply 4 apples by 5. We cannot
multiply 4 apples by 5 boys, for then we should get 20 "boy-apples," an
expression which has no meaning. Or, again, to distribute 20 apples
amongst 5 boys, we are not regarded as dividing 20 apples by 5 boys, but
as dividing 20 apples by the number 5. The multiplication or division
here involves the omission of the unit "boy," and the operation is
incomplete. The complete operation, in each case, is as follows.

(i) In the case of multiplication we commence with the conception of the
number "5" and the unit "boy"; and we then convert this unit into 4
apples, and thus obtain the result, 20 apples. The conversion of the
unit may be represented as multiplication by a factor (4 apples)/(1
boy), so that the operation is [(4 apples)/(1 boy)] × (5 boys) = 5 × [(4
apples)/(1 boy)] × (1 boy) = 5 × 4 apples = 20 apples. Similarly, to
convert £153 into shillings we must multiply it by a factor 20s./£1, so
that we get

  (20s./£1) × £153 = 153 × (20s./£1) × £1 = 153 × 20s. = 3060s.

Hence we can only regard £153 as being equal to 3060s. if we regard this
converting factor as unity.

(ii) In the case of partition we can express the complete operation if
we extend the meaning of division so as to enable us to divide 20 apples
by 5 boys. We thus get (20 apples)/(5 boys) = (4 apples)/(1 boy), which
means that the distribution can be effected by distributing at the rate
of 4 apples per boy. The converting factor mentioned under (i) therefore
represents a _rate_; and partition, applied to concrete cases, leads to
a rate.

In reference to the use of the sign × with the converting factor, it
should be observed that "(7 lb.)/(4 lb.) ×" symbolizes the replacing of
so many times 4 lb. by the same number of times 7 lb., while "(7/4) ×"
symbolizes the replacing of 4 times something by 7 times that something.

X. ARITHMETICAL REASONING

91. _Correspondence of Series of Numbers._--In §§ 33-42 we have dealt
with the parallelism of the original number-series with a series
consisting of the corresponding multiples of some unit, whether a number
or a numerical quantity; and the relations arising out of
multiplication, division, &c., have been exhibited by diagrams
comprising pairs of corresponding terms of the two series. This,
however, is only a particular case of the correspondence of two series.
In considering addition, for instance, we have introduced two parallel
series, each being the original number-series, but the two being placed
in different positions. If we add 1, 2, 3, ... to 6, we obtain a series
7, 8, 9, ... , the terms of which correspond with those of the original
series 1, 2, 3,...

Again, in §§ 61-75 and 84-88 we have considered various kinds of numbers
other than those in the original number-series. In general, these have
involved two of the original numbers, e.g. 5³ involves 5 and 3, and
log2 8 involves 2 and 8. In some cases, however, e.g. in the case of
negative numbers and reciprocals, only one is involved; and there might
be three or more, as in the case of a number expressed by (a + b)^n. If
all but one of these constituent elements are settled beforehand, e.g.
if we take the numbers 5, 5², 5³, ..., or the numbers [root 3]1, [root
3]2, [root 3]3, ... or log10 1.001, log10 1.002, log10 1.003 ... we
obtain a series in which each term corresponds with a term of the
original number-series.

       A              B               C
  +---+-----+    +---+----+    +---+---------+
  | n |6 + n|    | n | 4n |    | n | [root]n |
  +---+-----+    +---+----+    +---+---------+
  | 0 |  6  |    | 0 |  0 |    | 0 |   .000  |
  | 1 |  7  |    | 1 |  4 |    | 1 |  1.000  |
  | 2 |  8  |    | 2 |  8 |    | 2 |  1.414  |
  | 3 |  9  |    | 3 | 12 |    | 3 |  1.732  |
  | . |  .  |    | . |  . |    | . |    .    |
  | . |  .  |    | . |  . |    | . |    .    |
  | . |  .  |    | . |  . |    | . |    .    |
  +---+-----+    +---+----+    +---+---------+

This correspondence is usually shown by _tabulation_, i.e. by the
formation of a table in which the original series is shown in one
column, and each term of the second series is placed in a second column
opposite the corresponding term of the first series, each column being
headed by a description of its contents. It is sometimes convenient to
begin the first series with 0, and even to give the series of negative
numbers; in most cases, however, these latter are regarded as belonging
to a different series, and they need not be considered here. The
diagrams, A, B, C are simple forms of tables; A giving a sum-series, B a
multiple-series, and C a series of square roots, calculated
approximately.

92. _Correspondence of Numerical Quantities._--Again, in § 89, we have
considered cases of multiple-tables of numerical quantities, where each
quantity in one series is _equivalent_ to the corresponding quantity in
the other series. We might extend this principle to cases in which the
terms of two series, whether of numbers or of numerical quantities,
merely _correspond_ with each other, the correspondence being the result
of some relation. The volume of a cube, for instance, bears a certain
relation to the length of an edge of the cube. This relation is not one
of proportion; but it may nevertheless be expressed by tabulation, as
shown at D.

               D
  +-----------+-------------+
  | Length of |    Volume   |
  |  edge in  |      of     |
  |   inches. |     cube.   |
  +-----------+-------------+
  |     0     |     Nil.    |
  |     1     |  1 cub. in. |
  |     2     |  8 cub. in. |
  |     3     | 27 cub. in. |
  |     .     |      .      |
  |     .     |      .      |
  |     .     |      .      |
  +-----------+-------------+

93. _Interpolation._--In most cases the quantity in the second column
may be regarded as increasing or decreasing continuously as the number
in the first column increases, and it has intermediate values
corresponding to intermediate (i.e. fractional or decimal) numbers not
shown in the table. The table in such cases is not, and cannot be,
complete, even up to the number to which it goes. For instance, a cube
whose edge is 1½ in. has a definite volume, viz. 3(3/8) cub. in. The
determination of any such intermediate value is performed by
_Interpolation_ (q.v.).

In treating a fractional number, or the corresponding value of the
quantity in the second column, as intermediate, we are in effect
regarding the numbers 1, 2, 3, ..., and the corresponding numbers in the
second column, as denoting points between which other numbers lie, i.e.
we are regarding the numbers as _ordinal_, not cardinal. The transition
is similar to that which arises in the case of geometrical measurement
(§ 26), and it is an essential feature of all reasoning with regard to
continuous quantity, such as we have to deal with in real life.

94. _Nature of Arithmetical Reasoning._--The simplest form of
arithmetical reasoning consists in the determination of the term in one
series corresponding to a given term in another series, when the
relation between the two series is given; and it implies, though it does
not necessarily involve, the establishment of each series as a whole by
determination of its unit. A method involving the determination of the
unit is called a _unitary_ method. When the unit is not determined, the
reasoning is algebraical rather than arithmetical. If, for instance,
three terms of a proportion are given, the fourth can be obtained by the
relation given at the end of § 57, this relation being then called the
_Rule of Three_; but this is equivalent to the use of an algebraical
formula.

More complicated forms of arithmetical reasoning involve the use of
series, each term in which corresponds to particular terms in two or
more series jointly; and cases of this kind are usually dealt with by
special methods, or by means of algebraical formulae. The old-fashioned
problems about the amount of work done by particular numbers of men,
women and boys, are of this kind, and really involve the solution of
simultaneous equations. They are not suitable for elementary purposes,
as the arithmetical relations involved are complicated and difficult to
grasp.

XI. METHODS OF CALCULATION

(i.) _Exact Calculation._

95. _Working from Left._--It is desirable, wherever possible, to perform
operations on numbers or numerical quantities from the left, rather than
from the right. There are several reasons for this. In the first place,
an operation then corresponds more closely, at an elementary stage, with
the concrete process which it represents. If, for instance, we had one
sum of £3, 15s. 9d. and another of £2, 6s. 5d., we should add them by
putting the coins of each denomination together and commencing the
addition with the £. In the second place, this method fixes the
attention at once on the larger, and therefore more important, parts of
the quantities concerned, and thus prevents arithmetical processes from
becoming too abstract in character. In the third place, it is a better
preparation for dealing with approximate calculations. Finally,
experience shows that certain operations in which the result is written
down at once--e.g. addition or subtraction of two numbers or quantities,
and multiplication by some small numbers--are with a little practice
performed more quickly and more accurately from left to right.

96. _Addition._--There is no difference in principle between addition
(or subtraction) of numbers and addition (or subtraction) of numerical
quantities. In each case the grouping system involves rearrangement,
which implies the commutative law, while the counting system requires
the expression of a quantity in different denominations to be regarded
as a notation in a varying scale (§§ 17, 32). We need therefore consider
numerical quantities only, our results being applicable to numbers by
regarding the digits as representing multiples of units in different
denominations.

When the result of addition in one denomination can be partly expressed
in another denomination, the process is technically called _carrying_.
The name is a bad one, since it does not correspond with any ordinary
meaning of the verb. It would be better described as _exchanging_, by
analogy with the "changing" of subtraction. When, e.g., we find that the
sum of 17s. and 18s. is 35s., we take out 20 of the 35 shillings, and
exchange them for £1.

To add from the left, we have to look ahead to see whether the next
addition will require an exchange. Thus, in adding £3, 17s. 0d. to £2,
18s. 0d., we write down the sum of £3 and £2 as £6, not as £5, and the
sum of 17s. and 18s. as 15s., not as 35s.

When three or more numbers or quantities are added together, the result
should always be checked by adding both upwards and downwards. It is
also useful to look out for pairs of numbers or quantities which make 1
of the next denomination, e.g. 7 and 3, or 8d. and 4d.

97. _Subtraction._--To subtract £3, 5s. 4d. from £9, 7s. 8d., on the
grouping system, we split up each quantity into its denominations,
perform the subtractions independently, and then regroup the results as
the "remainder" £6, 2s. 4d. On the counting system we can count either
forwards or backwards, and we can work either from the left or from the
right. If we count forwards we find that to convert £3, 5s. 4d. into £9,
7s. 8d. we must successively add £6, 2s. and 4d. if we work from the
left, or 4d., 2s. and £6 if we work from the right. The intermediate
values obtained by the successive additions are different according as
we work from the left or from the right, being £9, 5s. 4d. and £9, 7s.
4d. in the one case, and £3, 5s. 8d. and £3, 7s. 8d. in the other. If we
count backwards, the intermediate values are £3, 7s. 8d. and £3, 5s. 8d.
in the one case, and £9, 7s. 4d. and £9, 5s. 4d. in the other.

The determination of each element in the remainder involves reference to
an addition-table. Thus to subtract 5s. from 7s. we refer to an
addition-table giving the sum of any two quantities, each of which is
one of the series 0s., 1s., ... 19s.

Subtraction by counting forward is called _complementary addition_.

To subtract £3, 5s. 8d. from £9, 10s. 4d., on the grouping system, we
must _change_ 1s. out of the 10s. into 12d., so that we subtract £3, 5s.
8d. from £9, 9s. 16d. On the counting system it will be found that, in
determining the number of shillings in the remainder, we subtract 5s.
from 9s. if we count forwards, working from the left, or backwards,
working from the right; while, if we count backwards, working from the
left, or forwards, working from the right, the subtraction is of 6s.
from 10s. In the first two cases the successive values (in direct or
reverse order) are £3, 5s. 8d., £9, 5s. 8d., £9, 9s. 8d. and £9, 10s.
4d.; while in the last two cases they are £9, 10s. 4d., £3, 10s. 4d.,
£3, 6s. 4d. and £3, 5s. 8d.

In subtracting from the left, we look ahead to see whether a 1 in any
denomination must be reserved for changing; thus in subtracting 274 from
637 we should put down 2 from 6 as 3, not as 4, and 7 from 3 as 6.

98. _Multiplication-Table._--For multiplication and division we use a
_multiplication-table_, which is a multiple-table, arranged as explained
in § 36, and giving the successive multiples, up to 9 times or further,
of the numbers from 1 (or better, from 0) to 10, 12 or 20. The column
(vertical) headed 3 will give the multiples of 3, while the row
(horizontal) commencing with 3 will give the values of 3 × 1, 3 × 2,...
To multiply by 3 we use the row. To divide by 3, in the sense of
partition, we also use the row; but to divide by 3 as a unit we use the
column.

99. _Multiplication by a Small Number._--The idea of a large multiple
of a small number is simpler than that of a small multiple of a large
number, but the calculation of the latter is easier. It is therefore
convenient, in finding the product of two numbers, to take the smaller
as the multiplier.

To find 3 times 427, we apply the distributive law (§ 58 (vi)) that
3·427 = 3(400 + 20 + 7) = 3·400 + 3·20 + 3·7. This, if we regard 3·427
as 427 + 427 + 427, is a direct consequence of the commutative law for
addition (§ 58 (iii)), which enables us to add separately the hundreds,
the tens and the ones. To find 3·400, we treat 100 as the unit (as in
addition), so that 3·400 = 3·4·100 = 12·100 = 1200; and similarly for
3·20. These are examples of the associative law for multiplication (§ 58
(iv)).

100. _Special Cases._--The following are some special rules:--

(i) To multiply by 5, multiply by 10 and divide by 2. (And conversely,
to divide by 5, we multiply by 2 and divide by 10.)

(ii) In multiplying by 2, from the left, add 1 if the next figure of the
multiplicand is 5, 6, 7, 8 or 9.

(iii) In multiplying by 3, from the left, add 1 when the next figures
are not less than 33 ... 334 and not greater than 66 ... 666, and 2 when
they are 66 ... 667 and upwards.

(iv) To multiply by 7, 8, 9, 11 or 12, treat the multiplier as 10 - 3,
10 - 2, 10 - 1, 10 + 1 or 10 + 2; and similarly for 13, 17, 18, 19, &c.

(v) To multiply by 4 or 6, we can either multiply from the left by 2 and
then by 2 or 3, or multiply from the right by 4 or 6; or we can treat
the multiplier as 5 - 1 or 5 + 1.

101. _Multiplication by a Large Number._--When both the numbers are
large, we split up one of them, preferably the multiplier, into separate
portions. Thus 231·4273 = (200 + 30 + 1)·4273 = 200·4273 + 30·4273 +
1·4273. This gives the _partial products_, the sum of which is the
complete products. The process is shown fully in A below,--

        A                  B                C
       |                  |
       |   4273           |   4273      1 -  04273
  -----+--------    ------+---------    2 -  08546
   200 | 854600           | 8546        3 -  12819
    30 | 128190       231 | 12819       .      .
     1 |   4273           |   4273      .      .
  -----+--------          +---------    .      .
   231 | 987063           | 987063     10 - 042730
  ==============          ==========

and more concisely in B. To multiply 4273 by 200, we use the commutative
law, which gives 200·4273 = 2 × 100 × 4273 = 2 × 4273 × 100 = 8546 × 100
= 854600; and similarly for 30·4273. In B the terminal 0's of the
partial products are omitted. It is usually convenient to make out a
preliminary table of multiples up to 10 times; the table being checked
at 5 times (§ 100) and at 10 times.

The main difficulty is in the correct placing of the curtailed partial
products. The first step is to regard the product of two numbers as
containing as many digits as the two numbers put together. The table of
multiples will them be as in C. The next step is to arrange the
multiplier and the multiplicand above the partial products. For
elementary work the multiplicand may come immediately after the
multiplier, as in D; the last figure of each partial product then comes
immediately under the corresponding figure of the multiplier. A better
method, which leads up to the multiplication of decimals and of
approximate values of numbers, is to place the first figure of the
multipler under the first figure of the multiplicand, as in E; the first
figure of each partial product will then come under the corresponding
figure of the multiplier.

         D                   E
      |     |              | 4273
      | 4273| 231          | 231
  ----+-----+-----     ----+---------
      | 0854:6             | 08546
  231 |  128:19        231 |  12819
      |   04:273           |   04273
      +-----:-----         +---------
      | 0987:063           | 0987063
      =============        ==========

102. _Contracted Multiplication._--The partial products are sometimes
omitted; the process saves time in writing, but is not easy. The
principle is that, e.g. (a·10² + b·10 + c)(p·10² + q^10 + r) = ap·10^4 +
(aq + bp)·10³ + (ar + bq + cp)·10² + (br + cq)·10 + cr. Hence the
digits are multiplied in pairs, and grouped according to the power of 10
which each product contains. A method of performing the process is shown
here for the case of 162·427. The principle is that 162·427 = 100·427 +
60·427 + 2·427 = 1·42700 + 6·4270 + 2·427; but, instead of writing down
the separate products, we (in effect) write 42700, 4270, and 427 in
separate rows, with the multipliers 1, 6, 2 in the margin, and then
multiply each number in each column by the corresponding multiplier in
the margin, making allowance for any figures to be "carried." Thus the
second figure (from the right) is given by 1 + 2·2 + 6·7 = 47, the 1
being carried.

  +---+-------
  | 1 | 427
  | 6 |  427
  | 2 |   427
  +---+-------
        69174
        =====

103. _Aliquot Parts._--For multiplication by a proper fraction or a
decimal, it is sometimes convenient, especially when we are dealing with
mixed quantities, to convert the multiplier into the sum or difference
of a number of fractions, each of which has 1 as its numerator. Such
fractions are called _aliquot parts_ (from Lat. _aliquot_, some,
several). This can usually be done in a good many ways. Thus 5/6 = 1 -
1/6, and also = ½ + 1/3; and 15% = .15 = 1/10 + 1/20 = 1/6 - 1/60 = 1/8
+ 1/40. The fractions should generally be chosen so that each part of
the product may be obtained from an earlier part by a comparatively
simple division. Thus ½ + 1/20 - 1/60 is a simpler expression for 8/15
than ½ + 1/30.

The process may sometimes by applied two or three times in succession;
thus 8/15 = 4/5 · 2/3 = (1 - 1/5)(1 - 1/3), and 33/40 = ¾ · 11/10 = (1 -
¼)(1 + 1/10).

104. _Practice._--The above is a particular case of the method called
_practice_, but the nomenclature of the method is confusing. There are
two kinds of practice, _simple practice_ and _compound practice_, but
the latter is the simpler of the two. To find the cost of 2 lb. 8 oz. of
butter at 1s. 2d. a lb., we multiply 1s. 2d. by 2(8/16) = 2½. This
straightforward process is called "compound" practice. "Simple" practice
involves an application of the commutative law. To find the cost of n
articles at £a, bs, cd. each, we express £a, bs, cd. in the form £(a +
f), where f is a fraction (or the sum of several fractions); we then say
that the cost, being n × £(a + f), is equal to (a + f) × £n, and apply
the method of compound practice, i.e. the method of aliquot parts.

105. _Multiplication of a Mixed Number._--When a mixed quantity or a
mixed number has to be multiplied by a large number, it is sometimes
convenient to express the former in terms of one only of its
denominations. Thus, to multiply £7, 13s. 6d. by 469, we may express the
former in any of the ways £7.675, 307/40 of £1, 153½s., 153.5s., 307
sixpences, or 1842 pence. Expression in £ and decimals of £1 is usually
recommended, but it depends on circumstances whether some other method
may not be simpler.

A sum of money cannot be expressed exactly as a decimal of £1 unless it
is a multiple of ¾d. A rule for approximate conversion is that 1s. = .05
of £1, and that 2½d.= .01 of £1. For accurate conversion we write .1£
for each 2s., and .001£ for each farthing beyond 2s., their number being
first increased by one twenty-fourth.

106. _Division._ Of the two kinds of division, although the idea of
partition is perhaps the more elementary, the process of measuring is
the easier to perform, since it is equivalent to a series of
subtractions. Starting from the dividend, we in theory keep on
subtracting the unit, and count the number of subtractions that have to
be performed until nothing is left. In actual practice, of course, we
subtract large multiples at a time. Thus, to divide 987063 by 427, we
reverse the procedure of § 101, but with intermediate stages. We first
construct the multiple-table C, and then subtract successively 200
times, 30 times and 1 times; these numbers being the _partial
quotients_. The theory of the process is shown fully in F. Treating x as
the unknown quotient corresponding to the original dividend, we obtain
successive dividends corresponding to quotients x - 200, x - 230 and x -
231. The original dividend is written as 0987063, since its initial
figures are greater than those of the divisor; if the dividend had
commenced with (e.g.) 3 ... it would not have been necessary to insert
the initial 0. At each stage of the division the number of digits in the
reduced dividend is decreased by one. The final dividend being 0000, we
have x - 231 = 0, and therefore x = 231.

             F
  +---------+----------+
  |         |     4273 |
  +=========+==========+
  | x       |  0987063 |
  +---------+----------+
  | 200     |  0854600 |
  +---------+----------+
  | x - 200 |   132463 |
  +---------+----------+
  | 30      |   128190 |
  +---------+----------+
  | x - 230 |    04273 |
  +---------+----------+
  | 1       |    04273 |
  +---------+----------+
  | x - 231 |     0000 |
  +---------+----------+

107. _Methods of Division._--What are described as different methods of
division (by a single divisor) are mainly different methods of writing
the successive figures occurring in the process. In _long division_ the
divisor is put on the left of the dividend, and the quotient on the
right; and each partial product, with the remainder after its
subtraction, is shown in full. In _short division_ the divisor and the
quotient are placed respectively on the left of and below the dividend,
and the partial products and remainders are not shown at all. The
_Austrian_ method (sometimes called in Great Britain the _Italian_
method) differs from these in two respects. The first, and most
important, is that the quotient is placed above the dividend. The
second, which is not essential to the method, is that the remainders are
shown, but not the partial products; the remainders being obtained by
working from the right, and using complementary addition. It is doubtful
whether the brevity of this latter process really compensates for its
greater difficulty.

The advantage of the Austrian arrangement of the quotient lies in the
indication it gives of the true value of each partial quotient. A
modification of the method, corresponding with D of § 101, is shown in
G; the fact that the partial product 08546 is followed by two blank
spaces shows that the figure 2 represents a partial quotient 200. An
alternative arrangement, corresponding to E of § 101, and suited for
more advanced work, is shown in H.

        G                   H
    |      |           | 4273
    | 4273 | 2         | 2
  --+------+-----    --+------------
    | 0987063          | 0987063
    | 08546            | 08546
  --+------------    --+------------
    |                  |

108. _Division with Remainder._--It has so far been assumed that the
division can be performed exactly, i.e. without leaving an ultimate
remainder. Where this is not the case, difficulties are apt to arise,
which are mainly due to failure to distinguish between the two kinds of
division. If we say that the division of 41d. by 12 gives quotient 3d.
with remainder 5d., we are speaking loosely; for in fact we only
distribute 36d. out of the 41d., the other 5d. remaining undistributed.
It can only be distributed by a subdivision of the unit; i.e. the true
result of the division is 3(5/12)d. On the other hand, we can quite well
express the result of dividing 41d. by 1s (= 12d.) as 3 with 5d. (not
"5") over, for this is only stating that 41d. = 3s. 5d.; though the
result might be more exactly expressed as 3(5/12)s.

Division with a remainder has thus a certain air of unreality, which is
accentuated when the division is performed by means of factors (§ 42).
If we have to divide 935 by 240, taking 12 and 20 as factors, the result
will depend on the fact that, in the notation of § 17,

         (20)   (12)
 935 = 3  "  17  "  11.

In incomplete partition the quotient is 3, and the remainders 11 and 17
are in effect disregarded; if, after finding the quotient 3, we want to
know what remainder would be produced by a direct division, the simplest
method is to multiply 3 by 240 and subtract the result from 935. In
complete partition the successive quotients are 77(11/12) and
3(17(11/12))/20 = 3(215/240).

Division in the sense of measuring leads to such a result as 935d. = £3,
17s. 11d.; we may, if we please, express the 17s. 11d. as 215d., but
there is no particular reason why we should do so.

109. _Division by a Mixed Number._--To divide by a mixed number, when
the quotient is seen to be large, it usually saves time to express the
divisor as either a simple fraction or a decimal of a unit of one of the
denominations. Exact division by a mixed number is not often required in
real life; where approximate division is required (e.g. in determining
the rate of a "dividend"), approximate expression of the divisor in
terms of the largest unit is sufficient.

110. _Calculation of Square Root._--The calculation of the square root
of a number depends on the formula (iii) of § 60. To find the square
root of N, we first find some number a whose square is less than N, and
subtract a² from N. If the complete square root is a + b, the remainder
after subtracting a² is (2a + b) b. We therefore guess b by dividing the
remainder by 2a, and form the product (2a + b) b. If this is equal to
the remainder, we have found the square root. If it exceeds the square
root, we must alter the value of b, so as to get a product which does
not exceed the remainder. If the product is less than the remainder, we
get a new remainder, which is N - (a + b)²; we then assume the full
square root to be c, so that the new remainder is equal to (2a + 2b + c)
c, and try to find c in the same way as we tried to find b.

An analogous method of finding cube root, based on the formula for (a +
b)³, used to be given in text-books, but it is of no practical use. To
find a root other than a square root we can use logarithms, as explained
in § 113.

(ii.) _Approximate Calculation._

111. _Multiplication._--When we have to multiply two numbers, and the
product is only required, or can only be approximately correct, to a
certain number of significant figures, we need only work to two or three
more figures (§ 83), and then correct the final figure in the result by
means of the superfluous figures.

       |  2734 3
       |  3141 59
  -----+-----------
       |  0820 29
       |   027 34
       |    10 94
       |     0 27
       |       14
       |        2
  -----+-----------
       |  0859

A common method is to reverse the digits in one of the numbers; but this
is only appropriate to the old-fashioned method of writing down products
from the right. A better method is to ignore the positions of the
decimal points, and multiply the numbers as if they were decimals
between .1 and 1.0. The method E of § 101 being adopted, the
multiplicand and the multiplier are written with a space after as many
digits (of each) as will be required in the product (on the principle
explained in § 101); and the multiplication is performed from the left,
two extra figures being kept in. Thus, to multiply 27.343 by 3.1415927
to one decimal place, we require 2 + 1 + 1 = 4 figures in the product.
The result is 085.9 = 85.9, the position of the decimal point being
determined by counting the figures before the decimal points in the
original numbers.

       |  3141 5927
       |  2734
  -----+------------
       |  0859 00
       |  0628 32
       |  -------
       |   230 68
       |   219 91
       |  -------
       |    10 77
       |     9 42
       |   ------
       |     1 35
       |     1 26
       |   ------

112. _Division._--In the same way, in performing approximate division,
we can at a certain stage begin to abbreviate the divisor, taking off
one figure (but with correction of the final figure of the partial
product) at each stage. Thus, to divide 85.9 by 3.1415927 to two places
of decimals, we in effect divide .0859 by .31415927 to four places of
decimals. In the work, as here shown, a 0 is inserted in front of the
859, on the principle explained in § 106. The result of the division is
27.34.

113. _Logarithms._--Multiplication, division, involution and evolution,
when the results cannot be exact, are usually most simply performed, at
any rate to a first approximation, by means of a table of logarithms.
Thus, to find the square root of 2, we have log [root]2 = log (2^½) =
½ log 2. We take out log 2 from the table, halve it, and then find from
the table the number of which this is the logarithm. (See LOGARITHM.)
The _slide-rule_ (see CALCULATING MACHINES) is a simple apparatus for
the mechanical application of the methods of logarithms.

When a first approximation has been obtained in this way, further
approximations can be obtained in various ways. Thus, having found
[root]2 = 1.414 approximately, we write [root]2 = 1.414 + [theta],
whence 2 = (1.414)² + (2.818)[theta] + [theta]². Since [theta]² is less
than ¼ of (.001)², we can obtain three more figures approximately by
dividing 2 - (1.414)² by 2.818.

114. _Binomial Theorem._--More generally, if we have obtained a as an
approximate value for the pth root of N, the binomial theorem gives as
an approximate formula [root p]N = a + [theta], where N = a^p +
pa^(p - 1)[theta].

115. _Series._--A number can often be expressed by a series of terms,
such that by taking successive terms we obtain successively closer
approximations. A decimal is of course a series of this kind, e.g.
3.14159 ... means 3 + 1/10 + 4/10² + 1/10³ + 5/10^4 + 9/10^5 + ... A
series of aliquot parts is another kind, e.g. 3.1416 is a little less
than 3 + 1/7 - 1/800.

_Recurring Decimals_ are a particular kind of series, which arise from
the expression of a fraction as a decimal. If the denominator of the
fraction, when it is in its lowest terms, contains any other prime
factors than 2 and 5, it cannot be expressed exactly as a decimal; but
after a certain point a definite series of figures will constantly
recur. The interest of these series is, however, mainly theoretical.

116. _Continued Products._--Instead of being expressed as the sum of a
series of terms, a number may be expressed as the product of a series of
factors, which become successively more and more nearly equal to 1. For
example,

  3.1416 = 3 × 10472/10000 = 3 × 1309/1250 = 3 × 22/21 × 2499/2500 =
    3(1 + 1/21)(1 - 1/2500).

Hence, to multiply by 3.1416, we can multiply by 3(1/7), and subtract
1/2500 (= .0004) of the result; or, to divide by 3.1416, we can divide
by 3, then subtract 1/22 of the result, and then add 1/2499 of the new
result.

117. _Continued Fractions._--The theory of _continued fractions_ (q.v.)
gives a method of expressing a number, in certain cases, as a continued
product. A continued fraction, of the kind we are considering, is an
expression of the form

            1
  a + -------------
              1
      b + ---------
                1
          c + -----
              d +   &c.

where b, c, d, ... are integers, and a is an integer or zero. The
expression is usually written, for compactness, a + 1/b+ 1/c+ 1/d+ &c.
The numbers a, b, c, d, ... are called the _quotients_.

Any exact fraction can be expressed as a continued fraction, and there
are methods for expressing as continued fractions certain other numbers,
e.g. square roots, whose values cannot be expressed exactly as
fractions.

The successive values, a/1, (ab + 1)/b, ..., obtained by taking account
of the successive quotients, are called _convergents_, i.e. convergents
to the true value. The following are the main properties of the
convergents.

(i) If we precede the series of convergents by 0/1 and 1/0, then the
numerator (or denominator) of each term of the series 0/1, 1/0, a/1, (ab
+ 1)/b ..., after the first two, is found by multiplying the numerator
(or denominator) of the last preceding term by the corresponding
quotient and adding the numerator (or denominator) of the term before
that. If a is zero, we may regard 1/b as the first convergent, and
precede the series by 1/0 and 0/1.

(ii) Each convergent is a fraction in its lowest terms.

(iii) The convergents are alternately less and greater than the true
value.

(iv) Each convergent is nearer to the true value than any other fraction
whose denominator is less than that of the convergent.

(v) The difference of two successive convergents is the reciprocal of
the product of their denominators; e.g. (ab + 1)/b - a/1 = 1/(1·b), and
(abc + c + a)/(bc + 1) - (ab + 1)/b = (-1)/[b(bc + 1)].

It follows from these last three properties that if the successive
convergents are p1/1, p2/q2, p3/q3, ... the number can be expressed in
the form p1(1 + 1/p1q2)(1 - 1/p2q3)(1 + 1/p3q4) ..., and that
if we go up to the factor 1 ± 1/(p_n)(q_(n + 1)) the product of these
factors differs from the true value of the number by less than ±[1/(q_n)
(q_(n + 1))].

In certain cases two or more factors can be combined so as to produce an
expression of the form 1 ± 1/k, where k is an integer. For instance,
3.1415927 = 3(1 + 1/3.7)(1 - 1/22.106)(1 + 1/333.113) ...; but the last
two of these factors may be combined as (1 - 1/22.113). Hence 3.1415927
= 3/1 · 22/21 · 2485/2486 ...

XII. APPLICATIONS

(i.) _Systems of Measures._[1]

118. _Metric System._--The metric system was adopted in France at the
end of the 18th century. The system is decimal throughout. The principal
units of length, weight and volume are the _metre, gramme_ (or _gram_)
and _litre_. Other units are derived from these by multiplication or
division by powers of 10, the names being denoted by prefixes. The
prefixes for multiplication by 10, 10², 10³ and 10^4 are _deca-, hecto-,
kilo-_ and _myria-_, and those for division by 10, 10² and 10³ are
_deci-, centi-_ and _milli-_; the former being derived from Greek, and
the latter from Latin. Thus _kilogramme_ means 1000 grammes, and
_centimetre_ means 1/100 of a metre. There are also certain special
units, such as the _hectare_, which is equal to a square hectometre, and
the _micron_, which is 1/1000 of a millimetre.

The metre and the gramme are defined by standard measures preserved at
Paris. The litre is equal to a cubic decimetre. The gramme was intended
to be equal to the weight of a cubic centimetre of pure water at a
certain temperature, but the equality is only approximate.

The metric system is now in use in the greater part of the civilized
world, but some of the measures retain the names of old disused
measures. In Germany, for instance, the _Pfund_ is ½ kilogramme, and is
approximately equal to 1(1/10) lb. English.

119. _British Systems._--The British systems have various origins, and
are still subject to variations caused by local usage or by the usage of
particular businesses. The following tables are given as illustrations
of the arrangement adopted elsewhere in this article; the entries in any
column denote multiples or submultiples of the unit stated at the head
of the column, and the entries in any row give the expression of one
unit in term of the other units.

    LENGTH

  +-------+-------+-------+--------+----------+---------+
  | Inch. | Foot. | Yard. | Chain. | Furlong. |   Mile. |
  +-------+-------+-------+--------+----------+---------+
  |     1 |  1/12 |  1/36 |  1/792 |   1/7920 | 1/63360 |
  +-------+-------+-------+--------+----------+---------+
  |    12 |     1 |   1/3 |   1/66 |    1/660 |  1/5280 |
  +-------+-------+-------+--------+----------+---------+
  |    36 |     3 |     1 |   1/22 |    1/220 |  1/1760 |
  +-------+-------+-------+--------+----------+---------+
  |   792 |    66 |    22 |      1 |     1/10 |    1/80 |
  +-------+-------+-------+--------+----------+---------+
  |  7920 |   660 |   220 |     10 |        1 |     1/8 |
  +-------+-------+-------+--------+----------+---------+
  | 63360 |  5280 |  1760 |     80 |        8 |       1 |
  +-------+-------+-------+--------+----------+---------+

    WEIGHT (AVOIRDUPOIS)

  +--------+--------+--------+----------+----------------+---------+
  | Ounce. | Pound. | Stone. | Quarter. | Hundredweight. |    Ton. |
  +--------+--------+--------+----------+----------------+---------+
  |      1 |   1/16 |  1/224 |    1/448 |     1/1792     | 1/33840 |
  +--------+--------+--------+----------+----------------+---------+
  |     16 |      1 |   1/14 |     1/28 |      1/112     |  1/2240 |
  +--------+--------+--------+----------+----------------+---------+
  |    224 |     14 |      1 |        ½ |        1/8     |   1/160 |
  +--------+--------+--------+----------+----------------+---------+
  |    448 |     28 |      2 |        1 |          ¼     |    1/80 |
  +--------+--------+--------+----------+----------------+---------+
  |   1792 |    112 |      8 |        4 |          1     |    1/20 |
  +--------+--------+--------+----------+----------------+---------+
  |  33840 |   2240 |    160 |       80 |         20     |       1 |
  +--------+--------+--------+----------+----------------+---------+
        (Also 7000 grains = 1 lb. avoirdupois.)

120. _Change of System._--It is sometimes necessary, when a quantity is
expressed in one system, to express it in another, The following are
the ratios of some of the units; each unit is expressed approximately as
a decimal of the other, and their ratio is shown as a continued product
(§ 116), a few of the corresponding convergents to the continued
fraction (§ 117) being added in brackets. It must be remembered that the
number expressing any quantity in terms of a unit is _inversely
proportional_ to the magnitude of the unit, i.e. the number of new units
is to be found by multiplying the number of old units by the ratio of
the old unit to the new unit.

          Yard    9144   10000   11   884   8225      /11 32   8 4 235\
         ----- = ----- = ----- = -- · --- · ---- ... ( --,-- = -·-,--- )
         Metre   10000   10935   12   385   8224      \32 35   7 5 257/.

       Inch      25400   10000   5   66   1651      /5  33  127\
    ---------- = ----- = ----- = - · -- · ---- ... ( -, --, --- )
    Centimetre   10000    3937   2   65   1650      \2  13   50/.

        Mile     16093   10000   8   185   2369      /8  37  103\
     --------- = ----- = ----- = - · --- · ---- ... ( -, --, --- )
     Kilometre   10000    6214   5   184   2368      \5  23   64/.

  Square Yard     8361   10000   5   306   15250      /5  51  250\
  ------------ = ----- = ----- = - · --- · ----- ... ( -, --, --- )
  Square Metre   10000   11960   6   305   15249      \6  61  299/.

         Acre     4047   10000   2   85   5320      /2  17  380\
       ------- = ----- = ----- = - · -- · ---- ... ( -, --, --- )
       Hectare   10000   24711   5   84   5321      \5  42  939/.

         Quart   11365   10000   8   175   8976     /8  25  408\
         ----- = ----- = ----- = - · --- · ---- ...( -, --, --- )
         Litre   10000    8799   7   176   8975     \7  22  359/.

      Pound       4536   10000   1   10   484   29391     /1   5  44  303\
    ---------- = ----- = ----- = - · -- · --- · ----- .. ( -, --, --, --- )
    Kilogramme   10000   22046   2   11   485   29392     \2  11  97  668/.

(ii.) _Special Applications._

121. _Commercial Arithmetic._--This term covers practically all dealings
with money which involve the application of the principle of proportion.
A simple class of cases is that which deals with equivalence of sums of
money in different currencies; these cases really come under § 120. In
other cases we are concerned with a proportion stated as a _numerical
percentage_, or as a _money percentage_ (i.e. a sum of money per £100),
or as a _rate_ in the £ or the shilling. The following are some
examples. Percentage: _Brokerage, commission, discount, dividend,
interest, investment, profit and loss._ Rate in the £: _Discount,
dividend, rates, taxes._ Rate in the shilling: _Discount._

Text-books on arithmetic usually contain explanations of the chief
commercial transactions in which arithmetical calculations arise; it
will be sufficient in the present article to deal with interest and
discount, and to give some notes on percentages and rates in the £.
_Insurance_ and _Annuities_ are matters of general importance, which are
dealt with elsewhere under their own headings.

122. _Percentages and Rates in the £._--In dealing with percentages and
rates it is important to notice whether the sum which is expressed as a
percentage of a rate on another sum is a part of or an addition to that
sum, or whether they are independent of one another. Income tax, for
instance, is calculated on income, and is in the nature of a deduction
from the income; but local rates are calculated in proportion to certain
other payments, actual or potential, and could without absurdity exceed
20s. in the £.

It is also important to note that if the increase or decrease of an
amount A by a certain percentage produces B, it will require a different
percentage to decrease or increase B to A. Thus, if B is 20% less than
A, A is 25% greater than B.

123. _Interest_ is usually calculated yearly or half-yearly, at a
certain rate per cent. on the principal. In legal documents the rate is
sometimes expressed as a certain sum of money "per centum per annum";
here "centum" must be taken to mean "£100."

_Simple interest_ arises where unpaid interest accumulates as a debt not
itself bearing interest; but, if this debt bears interest, the total,
i.e. interest and interest on interest, is called _compound interest._
If 100r is the rate per cent. per annum, the simple interest on £A for n
years is £nrA, and the compound interest (supposing interest payable
yearly) is £[(1 + r)^n - 1]A. If n is large, the compound interest is
most easily calculated by means of logarithms.

124. _Discount_ is of various kinds. Tradesmen allow discount for ready
money, this being usually at so much in the shilling or £. Discount may
be allowed twice in succession off quoted prices; in such cases the
second discount is off the reduced price, and therefore it is not
correct to add the two rates of discount together. Thus a discount of
20%, followed by a further discount of 25%, gives a total discount of
40%, not 45%, off the original amount. When an amount will fall due at
some future date, the _present value_ of the debt is found by deducting
discount at some rate per cent. for the intervening period, in the same
way as interest to be added is calculated. This discount, of course, is
not equal to the interest which the present value would produce at that
rate of interest, but is rather greater, so that the present value as
calculated in this way is less than the theoretical present value.

125. Applications to _Physics_ are numerous, but are usually only of
special interest. A case of general interest is the measurement of
_temperature._ The graduation of a thermometer is determined by the
freezing-point and the boiling-point of water, the interval between
these being divided into a certain number of degrees, representing equal
increases of temperature. On the Fahrenheit scale the points are
respectively 32° and 212°; on the Centigrade scale they are 0° and 100°;
and on the Réaumur they are 0° and 80°. From these data a temperature as
measured on one scale can be expressed on either of the other two
scales.

126. _Averages_ occur in statistics, economics, &c. An average is found
by adding together several measurements of the same kind and dividing by
the number of measurements. In calculating an average it should be
observed that the addition of any numerical quantity (positive or
negative) to each of the measurements produces the addition of the same
quantity to the average, so that the calculation may often be simplified
by taking some particular measurement as a new zero from which to
measure.

  AUTHORITIES.--For the history of the subject, see W.W.R. Ball,
  _Short History of Mathematics_ (1901), and F. Cajori, _History of
  Elementary Mathematics_ (1896); or more detailed information in M.
  Cantor, _Vorlesungen über Geschichte der Mathematik_ (1894-1901). L.
  C. Conant, _The Number-Concept_ (1896), gives a very full account of
  systems of numeration. For the latter, and for systems of notation,
  reference may also be made to Peacock's article "Arithmetic" in the
  _Encyclopaedia Metropolitana_, which contains a detailed account of
  the Greek system. F. Galton, _Inquiries into Human Faculty_ (1883),
  contains the first account of number-forms; for further examples and
  references see D.E. Phillips, "Genesis of Number-Forms," _American
  Journal of Psychology_, vol. viii. (1897). There are very few works
  dealing adequately but simply with the principles of arithmetic.
  Homersham Cox, _Principles of Arithmetic_ (1885), is brief and lucid,
  but is out of print. _The Psychology of Number_, by J.A. McLellan and
  J. Dewey (1895), contains valuable suggestions (some of which have
  been utilized in the present article), but it deals only with number
  as the measure of quantity, and requires to be read critically. This
  work contains references to Grube's system, which has been much
  discussed in America: for a brief explanation, see L. Seeley, _The
  Grube Method of Teaching Arithmetic_ (1890). On the teaching of
  arithmetic, and of elementary mathematics generally, see J.W.A.
  Young, _The Teaching of Mathematics in the Elementary and the
  Secondary School_ (1907); D.E. Smith, _The Teaching of Elementary
  Mathematics_ (1900), also contains an interesting general sketch; W.
  P. Turnbull, _The Teaching of Arithmetic_ (1903), is more elaborate.
  E.M. Langley, _A Treatise on Computation_ (1895), has notes on
  approximate and abbreviated calculation. Text-books on arithmetic in
  general and on particular applications are numerous, and any list
  would soon be out of date. Recent English works have been influenced
  by the brief _Report on the Teaching of Elementary Mathematics_,
  issued by the Mathematical Association (1905); but this is critical
  rather than constructive. The Association has also issued a _Report on
  the Teaching of Mathematics in Preparatory Schools_ (1907). In the
  United States of America the _Report of the Committee of Ten_ on
  secondary school studies (1893) and the _Report of the Committee of
  Fifteen_ on elementary education (1893-1894), both issued by the
  United States Bureau of Education, have attracted a good deal of
  attention. Sir O. Lodge, _Easy Mathematics, chiefly Arithmetic_
  (1905), treats the subject broadly in its practical aspects. The
  student who is interested in elementary teaching should consult the
  annual bibliographies in the _Pedagogical Seminary_; an article by D.
  E. Phillips in vol. v. (October 1897) contains references to works
  dealing with the psychological aspect of number. For an account of
  German methods, see W. King, _Report on Teaching of Arithmetic and
  Mathematics in the Higher Schools of Germany_ (1903).     (W. F. Sh.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] See also WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.