ARMATOLES (Gr. [Greek: armatolos], a man-at-arms), the name given to
some Greeks who discharged certain military and police functions under
the Turkish government. When the Turks under Sultan Mahommed II.
conquered Greece in the 15th century, many of the Greeks fled into the
mountainous districts of Macedonia and northern Greece, and maintained a
harassing warfare with the conquerors of their country. These men were
called _Klephts_ (modern Gr. [Greek: klephtaes], ancient [Greek:
kleptaes], a thief, a brigand), and during the 16th century the Turkish
pashas came to terms with some of them, and these men were allowed to
retain their local customs, and were confirmed in the possession of
certain districts, while in return they undertook some duties, such as
the custody of the highroads. Those who accepted these terms were called
_armatoles_, and the districts in which they lived _armatoliks_.
Strengthened by a considerable number of Christian Albanians, they
rendered good service in defending Greece, and to some extent repressed
the ravages of the _Klephts_; but their power and independence were
disliked by the Turks. After the peace of Belgrade in 1739 (between
Austria and Turkey), the Turkish government sought to weaken the
position of the _armatoles_. Their privileges were restricted,
Mahommedan Albanians were introduced into the _armatoliks_, and towards
the end of the 18th century their numbers were seriously reduced.
Irritated by this policy the _armatoles_ rendered considerable service
to Ali Pasha of Iannina in his struggle with the Turks in 1820-22, and
afforded valuable assistance to their countrymen during the Greek war of
independence in 1830.